

=== PAGE 1 ===

Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson One 
by Haukur Þorgeirsson and Óskar Guðlaugsson 
1. Miscellany 
1. About this course 
2. On learning languages in general 
3. On learning arcane languages 
4. Old Norse? Which Old Norse? 
5. English grammatical vocabulary 
2. Grammar 
1. Declension of pronouns 
2. Declension of nouns 
3. Article 
4. Gender of nouns 
5. Notes on word order 
3. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Pronoun 
3. Verbs 
4. Adverbs 
5. Conjunctions 
6. Sample sentences 
4. Exercises 
1. Mark the pronouns' cases (optional) 
2. Translate the phrases into English 
3. Translate the phrases into Norse 
4. Translate the text into English 
5. Translate the text into Norse 
5. Looking at real texts 
1. A few words from Snorra-Edda 
2. Two lines from the Völuspá 
0. Miscellany 
0.1 About this course 
This course is designed for speakers of English. No previous knowledge of 
Old Norse or any other language is needed or expected. 
The aim of the course is to aid beginning students of Old Norse in building up 
sufficient basic knowledge for the student to be able to start studying on his 
own after the course. The method is to focus on building up a firm 


=== PAGE 2 ===

understanding of the grammatical basics of the language, having the student 
use the language as much as possible. 
We will try throughout the course to spice it up with background information, 
as most students of Old Norse have strong interest in Old Norse culture as 
well as language. We will also refrain from using nonsensical sentences, 
preferring "real" made-up sentences or simplified versions of actual texts. 
Lessons are organised into four chapters. The first one (0) contains 
information that is not really the core of the matter but can be useful and 
interesting to read. The next one (1) contains the new grammar for the lesson, 
then (2) comes the vocabulary, all of which you should memorise, and then 
(3) exercises to help you get a hands on feeling for the subject. In the last 
chapter (4) we look at real texts or sentences from the literature. Do not get 
discouraged if this is difficult at times, you don't have to memorise everything 
there, just read through it. 
0.2 On learning languages in general 
The process of learning languages is often somewhat misperceived, especially 
in cultures with little tradition or need for it. Language learning is gradual, 
piece-by-piece, sometimes fast, sometimes slow, often rewarding, often 
frustrating. There is no black and white in language learning, no set stage 
where one "speaks the language", before which one understood and spoke 
nothing, after which one understands and speaks everything. It's an open-
ended process, from which one can enter and exit at will, always benefitting 
from every minute effort. How this relates to our course, is to make you 
understand that you will not exit from it completely fluent in Old Norse, 
having "finished" that language, because there is no finish line; but neither 
will you have wasted your time, because time invested in language study is 
never "lost". You are to emerge from the course having achieved a certain 
point, a certain skill level, from which you can benefit, even if it cannot be 
considered fluency. Most importantly, the end results should be gratifying and 
the process fun, though unavoidably hard at times. 
0.3 On learning arcane languages 
The study of arcane languages such as Old Norse has certain marked 
differences to the study of modern languages; the most important factor is, 
naturally, that one can never hear anybody speak the language. That can be a 
significant psychological obstacle in memorizing words and reading text. 
Coming from an experienced language learner, the problem with learning 
arcane languages is that one has no access to the "sound of the language", its 
very soul. This makes it more difficult to get a feel for its structure, to become 
comfortable with it, even to develop feelings for it, all factors not to be taken 
lightly. 


=== PAGE 3 ===

In studying arcane languages, one must deal with this by "reliving" and 
"realizing" the language, by familiarizing oneself with the culture of the 
language's former speakers and imagining the life behind it. One must 
understand that it was once the native language of a whole nation of people of 
all kinds, to whom it was as dear and natural as your first language is to you. 
Understand that those people thought in this language, expressed their needs 
in it, their love, their anger and hate, their first and last words; parent to child, 
friend to friend, husband to wife, foe to foe, any person to any other person. It 
was as living once as any given language of today, complete with slang, 
neologisms, swearing and nonsense, just as well as the more commonly 
known poetry and literature. Once one genuinely and truly understands this, 
one has gained an important psychological advantage in the learning process 
of an arcane language. 
0.4 Old Norse? Which Old Norse? 
The term Old Norse refers to the language spoken in Scandinavia and 
Scandinavian settlements from about 800 to about 1350. It should be obvious 
that it was not exactly the same language over a vast area and 550 years. It is 
usually split into two groups, which are then split into two dialects. 
West Norse 
East Norse 
Old Icelandic Old Norwegian 
Old Danish Old Swedish
Of all these, the dialect which preserved the most interesting literature is Old 
Icelandic. This course will teach Old Icelandic from the 13th century; when 
such works as Heimskringla and the Edda were composed. The spelling of 
Old Icelandic words is normalised to the accepted standard. When texts that 
are not from the 13th century are quoted we will still use the same spelling. 
The term 'Old Norse' is sometimes used to mean specifically what we here call 
'West Norse' or what we here call 'Old Icelandic'. It is sometimes applied to 
Icelandic up to the 16th century. 
0.5 English grammatical vocabulary 
It is quite possible to teach and learn languages without the use of 
grammatical terms. Indeed, a child does not learn to speak by first learning 
what a noun is. Yet, it is our opinion that it is practical to use grammatical 
vocabulary in describing the Old Norse language. This course assumes 
knowledge of the following words for parts of speech. Very short descriptions 
follow. 
• Noun: A name of a person, place or thing (book, Paris, John). 
• Adjective: A word that describes a noun (good, bad, ugly). 


=== PAGE 4 ===

• Pronoun: A word used instead of a noun (he, we, which). 
• Verb: A word that describes what someone is doing (do, kill, say). 
• Adverb: A word that describes a verb (well, highly, badly). 
• Conjunction: A connecting word (and, but, or). 
• Preposition: A word placed before a noun to indicate place, direction 
etc. (to, from, in). 
As new terms are introduced make an effort at understanding them; it is 
essential for making sense of the text. 
1. Grammar 
1.1 Declension of pronouns 
In Norse, nouns and pronouns are declined in cases. What on earth does that 
mean? We will use English as a starting point to explain. Consider the English 
sentence: "She loves me." If you have learnt syntax you will know that the 
"subject" of this sentence is the pronoun "she" and the "object" is the pronoun 
"me". If you haven't learnt syntax I'll let you in on the trick; the subject in a 
sentence is the word that is doing stuff, the object is the word stuff is done to. 
So, in our sentence "she" is doing stuff and it's being done to "me". Simple. 
Now let's look at another sentence: "I love her." Okay, now "I" is doing stuff, 
so "I" is the subject, and it's being done to "her" which must then be the object. 
Now consider; how does the English language distinguish between subject 
and object in a sentence? As you will see from our example there are two 
methods: 
1. Changing the word order. You will note that the word preceding the verb is 
the subject whereas the word following the verb is the object. 
2. Changing the form of the words. Aha! This is where things get interesting. 
Of course the "she" in the first sentence is the same person as the "her" in the 
second sentence, similarly the "I" and "me" refer to the same bloke. We say 
the word itself hasn't changed, only the form of it. We'll make a little table: 
Subject: 
I 
you he she it
Object: 
me you him her it
You will note that sometimes the word changes completely when switching 
between the roles of subject and object, like "I" to "me", sometimes it changes 
but remains recognisably the same, like "he" to "him", and sometimes it 
doesn't change at all, like "you" to "you". 
Now we have seen that English uses different forms of pronouns to represent 
subject and object but those different forms are also used for other things. 
Let's look at the sentence "I am he." Something strange has happened; 
preceding the verb there is a pronoun in the subject form, well and good, but 


=== PAGE 5 ===

following the verb is a pronoun that is also in the subject form. The 
explanation lies in the verb we're using; the verb "to be" doesn't really 
describe "stuff being done" (as we have so eloquently put it in this passage). 
It's more like an equals sign: "I = he". In such cases the word following the 
verb is called neither object nor subject but "complement". 
Now that we've found a new use for our subject form we'll have to redo our 
table: 
Subject, complement: 
I 
you he she it
Object: 
me you him her it
Now we might wonder whether there is another use for the object form as well. 
Indeed there is; consider the sentence "I saved it for him". Here "I" is the 
subject and "it" is the object, as you will have realised, but what about "him"? 
It's not following a verb so it can't be an object but it's still in the object form. 
We conclude that words following a preposition take the object form. Again 
we have to redo our table: 
Subject, complement: 
I 
you he she it
Object, prepositional: 
me you him her it
Now that we've found more than one use for both of our forms we'll name 
those forms for easy reference. We'll call them nominative and accusative and 
we'll refer to them collectively as the cases of the pronouns. We'll call this 
changing of forms by the pronouns declension. 
Nominative case: 
I 
you he she it
Accusative case: 
me you him her it
Remember what we stated at the beginning of this section? "In Norse, nouns 
and pronouns are declined in cases". Now we can state: "In English, pronouns 
are declined in cases". The beauty of it is that the Norse cases of nominative 
and accusative work exactly like the English cases we have been defining. 
Thus the nominative in Norse serves as subject and compliment and the 
accusative as object and prepositional. The Norse table corresponding to the 
English table above looks like this: 
Nominative case: 
ek þú hann hon þat
Accusative case: 
mik þik hann hana þat
You notice a slight resemblance between the two tables. You also note that, as 
with English, when the pronouns go from nominative to accusative they 


=== PAGE 6 ===

sometimes change much (ek - mik), sometimes little (hon - hana) and 
sometimes not at all (hann - hann). Now you can do exercise 3.1. 
1.2 Declension of nouns 
In the Norse language, nouns, like pronouns, are declined in cases. Again we 
start by discussing English. Consider the sentence "Peter calls Maggie." Here 
the subject is "Peter" and the object is "Maggie". Now another sentence: 
"Maggie calls Peter." The roles of subject and object have been switched, but 
how? Not by changing the forms of the words, as with the pronouns, but 
solely by changing the word order. In contrast, Norse solves the problem of 
distinguishing between subject and object with case endings and not word 
order. 
Now to the good stuff. Norse nouns are declined in cases. That is, the form of 
the nouns change depending on whether they play the role of nominative or 
accusative. The wonderful science of grammar puts nouns into different 
groups depending on their declension pattern. The first group we will look at 
is called "strong masculine"; accept those terms as arbitrary for now. 
The pattern of the strong masculine word is that they have the ending -r in the 
nominative. We'll look at some examples from our vocabulary in 2.1. 
Singular of the strong masculine declension: 
Nominative: 
álfr baugr Haukr konungr
Accusative: 
álf baug Hauk konung 
Note that proper names (like Haukr here) are declined in cases like any other 
nouns. 
1.3 Article 
In English there are two kinds of articles; the indefinite article "a and an" and 
the definite article "the". The Norse language has no indefinite article, thus 
"draugr" by itself means "a ghost". Norse, however, does have a definite 
article though it doesn't work quite like the English one. Rather than being a 
small unchanging word preceding nouns the Norse article is a suffix 
depending on case, gender and number. For the masculine words we've 
introduced the article in both nominative singular and accusative singular is "-
inn" tacked on to the words. Thus: 
 
Indefinite Definite
Nominative 
álfr 
álfrinn 
Accusative 
álf 
álfinn 


=== PAGE 7 ===

or in so many words: 
álfr = an elf (nominative) álfrinn = the elf (nominative) 
álf = an elf (accusative) álfinn = the elf (accusative) 
1.4 Gender of nouns 
We said before that the group of nouns we're looking at is called strong 
masculine. The "strong" classification is arbitrary but we're going to let you in 
on the masculine thing. Every word in Norse has an arbitrary "gender", 
masculine, feminine or neuter. When we refer to a word with a certain gender 
we have to use the pronoun with the same gender. Thus masculine nouns take 
the masculine pronoun (hann=he), feminine nouns take the feminine pronoun 
(hon=she) and neuter nouns take the neuter pronoun (þat=it). Since all the 
nouns used in this chapter are masculine you'll be concerned with "hann" for 
now. 
1.5 Notes on word order 
Word order in English is quite rigid. For a simple sentence it's always 
"subject-verb-object". In Norse this is not so, the word order is quite free, 
mainly because the information about which word plays which role is given 
by grammatical endings (cases and more) whereas English relies on word 
order to convey this information. Remember to check the grammatical ending 
of Norse words to find their place in the sentence. 
This is not to say that there aren't certain conventions on word order in Norse. 
Most often there is one thing that is most natural but be prepared to meet 
anything. 
In Norse, titles usually follow the name they refer to; thus 'king Óláfr' is 'Óláfr 
konungr'. 
2. Vocabulary 
2.1. Nouns 
All nouns here are of the strong masculine declension. 
álfr 
elf 
baugr 
ring 
brandr 
sword 


=== PAGE 8 ===

dvergr 
dwarf 
draugr 
ghost 
hestr 
horse 
haukr 
hawk 
hjálmr 
helmet 
konungr 
king 
knífr 
knife 
ormr 
worm, serpent
úlfr 
wolf 
Names: 
Haukr 
Óláfr 
Sigurðr 
Tyrfingr
2.2 Pronoun 
hann 
he, it
We gloss the word as both "he" and "it" as it can refer both to men and to 
things with masculine gender. Remember that all the nouns given in this 
lesson are of masculine gender. 
2.3 Verbs 
The forms given here are the third person singular of the verbs. This 
corresponds with the English s-form (like "sees" and "hears"). This is all you 
need to know for now. 


=== PAGE 9 ===

á 
owns 
er 
is (takes a complement!) 
heitir 
is called (takes a complement!)
sér 
sees 
segir 
says 
tekr 
takes 
vegr 
kills (usually in battle), slays 
Sometimes the subject is dropped and the verb alone gives the meaning. Thus 
'vegr' alone might mean 'he kills'. 
2.4 Adverbs 
hér 
here
eigi 
not 
ok 
also
2.5 Conjunctions 
These conjunctions are used much as in English. Note that 'ok' can be either 
an adverb or a conjunction, depending on context. 
ok 
and
en 
but
2.6 Sample sentences 
The following sentences represent one approach to tackling Norse sentences. 
If you're comfortable with it you can employ it yourself in the exercises. 
1. Vegr orminn Óláfr. 
o Subject: Óláfr [nominative, proper name] 


=== PAGE 10 ===

o Object: orminn [accusative, with article] 
o Meaning: Óláfr kills the serpent 
2. Baug á dvergr 
o Subject: dvergr [nominative, without article] 
o Object: baug [accusative, without article] 
o Meaning: A dwarf has a ring. 
3. Draugrinn sér konunginn. 
o Subject: draugrinn [nominative, with article] 
o Object: konunginn [accusative, with article] 
o Meaning: The ghost sees the king. 
4. Heitir konungrinn Óláfr. 
o Subject: konungrinn [nominative, with article] 
o Complement: Óláfr [nominative, proper name] 
o Meaning: The king is called Óláfr. 
After you finish studying the vocabulary you should take on the remaining 
exercises. 
3. Exercises 
3.1 Mark the pronouns' cases (optional) 
In the following bible quotes there are many pronouns. Locate them and find 
out what case they're in. Also note the reason they are in that case. 
• a) I am he that liveth. 
• b) Take now thy son whom thou lovest and offer him there for a burnt 
offering. 
• c) And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of her, 
and said unto her: "Come lie with me, my sister". 
• d) Him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat. 
• e) Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise. 
3.2 Translate the phrases into English. 
• a) Dvergrinn á baug. 
• b) Hjálm á Haukr. 
• c) Álfrinn sér draug. 
• d) Hann er konungrinn. 
• e) Hann sér dverginn. 
3.3 Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
• a) The ghost kills the king. 


=== PAGE 11 ===

• b) The elf kills a wolf. 
• c) The king sees a hawk. 
• d) Óláfr is a king. 
• e) A king is named Óláfr. 
3.4 Translate the text into English 
Óláfr heitir konungr. Hann á brand. Heitir brandrinn Tyrfingr. Úlf sér Óláfr ok 
segir: "Hér er úlfr!". Óláfr tekr brandinn ok vegr úlfinn. En hér er ok ormr. 
Óláfr sér hann eigi. Óláf vegr ormrinn. 
3.5 Translate the text into Old Norse 
A king is called Sigurðr. He owns a sword but not a horse. Óláfr is also a king. 
He owns a horse. Sigurðr kills Óláfr and takes the horse. 
4. Looking at real texts 
4.1 A few words from the Snorra-Edda 
En er Jörmunrekkr konungr sá haukinn...
Glossary: 
 
er 
when 
sá 
saw (past tense of 'sér')
 
Meaning: "But when king Jörmunrekkr saw the hawk..." 
The subject of the sentence 'Jörmunrekkr konungr' is in the nominative case 
whereas the object 'haukinn' is in the accusative case. 
To find out just what happened when king Jörmunrekkr saw the hawk you 
will have to look up chapter 50 of the Skáldskaparmál. 
4.2 Two lines from the Völuspá 
In Völuspá (The Prophecy of the Seeress) the seeress says: 
Ask veit ek standa.
Heitir Yggdrasill. 
Glossary: 


=== PAGE 12 ===

askr 
ash tree 
veit ek 
I know 
standa 
(to) stand
 
There are some things you should notice here. The first word of the sentence, 
'ask', is the object. You can see that because it is in the accusative form. Then 
comes the verb 'veit' and then the subject 'ek'. Thus the word order is 'object-
verb-subject'. 
The second sentence has no subject. Instead of 'Hann heitir Yggdrasill.' we 
have only 'Heitir Yggdrasill.' It is quite normal in poetry that the subject be 
dropped. 
Meaning: 
"I know an ash tree to stand. 
It is called Yggdrasill." 
 
 
Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson Two 
by Haukur Þorgeirsson and Óskar Guðlaugsson 
1. Grammar 
1. First and second person personal pronouns 
2. Plural of third person pronouns 
3. Plural of nouns 
4. Slightly irregular nouns 
5. Maðr - an irregular noun 
6. Verbal conjugation 
7. "Er" - an all purpose relative pronoun 
8. The present tense 
9. Word order 
2. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Pronouns 
3. Verbs 
4. Adverbs 
5. A greeting 
6. Yes or no questions 
7. Sample sentences 


=== PAGE 13 ===

3. Exercises 
1. Translate the phrases into English 
2. Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
3. Translate the text into English 
4. Translate the text into Old Norse 
5. Translate the play into English 
6. Translate the play into English 
4. Looking at real texts 
1. Half a stanza by Snorri Sturluson 
2. Two half-strophes from the Sigdrífumál 
1. Grammar 
1.1 First and second person personal pronouns 
Now you have to learn those singular personal pronouns: 
 
1.person 
2.person
Nominative 
ek 
þú 
Accusative 
mik 
þik 
The corresponding English table looks like this: 
 
1.person 
2.person
Nominative 
I 
you 
Accusative 
me 
you 
The forms 'þú' and 'þik' are the relatives of the English forms 'thou' and 'thee'. 
And then there are the plural pronouns, still fairly similar to English: 
 
1.person 
2.person
Nominative 
vér 
þér 
Accusative 
oss 
yðr 
 
1.person 
2.person
Nominative 
we 
you 


=== PAGE 14 ===

Accusative 
us 
you 
And finally a concept that doesn't exist in Modern English, dual pronouns: 
 
1.person 
2.person
Nominative 
vit 
þit 
Accusative 
okkr 
ykkr 
 
1.person 
2.person
Nominative 
we two 
you two
Accusative 
us two 
you two
1.2 Plural of third person pronouns 
We will now introduce the plural of the third person pronouns. As before we 
begin with English. 
 
Singular  
Plural 
Nominative 
he she it  
they they they
Accusative 
him her it  
them them them
The reason for writing "they" out three times is that the plural of "he" is the 
same as the plural of "she" or the plural of "it", unlike Old Norse : 
 
Singular 
 
Plural 
Nominative 
hann hon þat  
þeir þær þau
Accusative 
hann hana þat  
þá þær þau
Thus, many "hons" make a "þær" and many "hanns" make a "þeir" (to put it in 
silly terms). We are still only using the masculine pronoun as all nouns we 
have introduced are masculine. 
1.3 Plural of nouns 
Nouns, of course, have a plural form. The plural form declines in cases and 
can be with or without definitive article. We'll write up a table showing the 


=== PAGE 15 ===

declension of our strong masculine words. This time we will use a {stem + 
ending} scheme. The grammatical stem of a word is the word without 
grammatical ending. 
 
Without article 
With article 
 
Singular Plural 
Singular 
Plural 
Nom. 
stem + r stem + ar 
stem + r + inn stem + ar + nir
Acc. 
stem 
stem + a 
stem + inn 
stem + a + na 
And then with the good old elf as the example. 
 
Without article With article 
 
Singular Plural Singular Plural 
Nom. 
álfr 
álfar 
álfrinn álfarnir
Acc. 
álf 
álfa 
álfinn 
álfana 
Now you know eight different forms of each noun. This might be a bit 
overwhelming at first but if you immediately begin memorising the table 
above and work hard at the exercises it will soon be very familiar. 
1.4 Some slightly irregular nouns 
Some words of the strong masculine declension lack the nominative singular 
ending 'r'. 
In order to make it completely clear what we mean we decline a sample word 
from this group. The word is 'jarl' and means 'earl'. The reason is probably that 
pronouncing "jarlr" would not be comfortable. 
 
Without article 
With article 
 
Singular Plural 
Singular Plural 
Nom. 
jarl 
jarlar 
jarlinn jarlarnir
Acc. 
jarl 
jarla 
jarlinn jarlana 
The vocabulary also introduces the word 'geirr'. It is completely regular, so do 
not get confused by the two r's at the end. The first r is part of the stem 
whereas the second one is the nominative singular ending. 


=== PAGE 16 ===

1.5 Maðr - an irregular noun 
We will now introduce a masculine noun that in its declension does not follow 
the patterns already described. The word is 'maðr' and means 'human being' or 
'person'. 
 
Without article 
With article 
 
Singular Plural 
Singular Plural 
Nom. 
maðr 
menn 
maðrinn menninir
Acc. 
mann 
menn 
manninn mennina
Notice how the irregularity is similar to that of the corresponding English 
word, 'man'. Also notice that the endings for the article are very similar to 
those for the regular words. This is no coincidence, in fact the article declines 
in the same basic way for every word of the same gender. 
The word 'maðr' is a very useful one and will help us make more interesting 
sentences. 
1.6 Verbal conjugation 
The form of a verb depends upon the subject in the sentence, so in Old Norse 
as it is in English. Let us give an example 
Infinitive: (to) be 
I am 
we are 
thou art 
you are
he/she/it is they are
We will now give the corresponding Old Norse verb; like its English 
counterpart, it is completely irregular. 
Infinitive: (at) vera 
ek em 
vit/vér erum 
þú ert 
þit/þér eruð 
hann/hon/þat er þeir/þær/þau eru


=== PAGE 17 ===

Remember what everything means here. The plural of 'hann' is 'þeir' et cetera. 
Also note that the dual pronouns have the same conjugation as the plural ones. 
Now we will look at more regular verbs. We don't have to remember every 
form of every verb; for now it will be sufficient for us to remember two; the 
infinitive and the first person singular. The endings are tacked on in the 
following way. 
Infinitive: [form 1] 
ek [form 2] 
vit/vér [form 1] - a + um
þú [form 2] + r 
þit/þér [form 1] - a + ið 
hann/hon/þat [form 2] + r þeir/þær/þau [form 1] 
This code may be a bit cryptic. When I say " - a + um" I mean "subtract 'a' and 
add 'um'". This is best illustrated with examples: 
vega, veg 
ek veg 
vit/vér vegum 
þú vegr 
þit/þér vegið 
hann/hon/þat vegr 
þeir/þær/þau vega
heita, heiti 
ek heiti 
vit/vér heitum 
þú heitir 
þit/þér heitið 
hann/hon/þat heitir 
þeir/þær/þau heita
taka, tek 
ek tek 
vit/vér tökum (explained below)
þú tekr 
þit/þér takið 
hann/hon/þat tekr 
þeir/þær/þau taka 


=== PAGE 18 ===

segja, segi 
ek segi 
vit/vér segjum 
þú segir 
þit/þér segið (explained below)
hann/hon/þat segir 
þeir/þær/þau segja 
kalla, kalla (to call) 
ek kalla 
vit/vér köllum 
þú kallar 
þit/þér kallið 
hann/hon/þat kallar 
þeir/þær/þau kalla
hafa, hefi (to have, wear, carry)
ek hefi 
vit/vér höfum 
þú hefir 
þit/þér hafið 
hann/hon/þat hefir 
þeir/þær/þau hafa
And now for one verb that is almost regular, but not quite: 
sjá, sé (to see) 
ek sé 
vit/vér sjám (not *sjáum)
þú sér 
þit/þér séð (not *sjáið) 
hann/hon/þat sér 
þeir/þær/þau sjá 
• A u in a grammatical ending always changes a preceding 'a' to an 'ö'. 
This is known as u-mutation and is treated in more detail later. 
• The letters 'j' and 'i' cannot coexist; for this reason we have 'segið' and 
not '*segjið'. 
• We won't use the infinitive just yet but it is still one of two forms of 
each verb you need to memorise. 


=== PAGE 19 ===

• The verb 'á' does not follow this pattern, it is conjugated in lesson 3. 
• The forms 'sjáum' and 'sjáið' are correct in later Icelandic. 
1.7 "Er" - an all purpose relative pronoun 
Relative pronouns are words like 'who, which, that'. In Norse we have one 
very useful word that can play the role of all those. The word is 'er' and it 
should not be confused with the 3rd person singular of the verb "to be". An 
example will be in order. 
The people (that) he sees are 
Norwegians. 
Relative pronoun can be 
dropped. 
Menninir, er hann sér, eru Norðmenn. Relative pronoun cannot be 
dropped. 
We say that the relative pronoun represents a word from the main sentence in 
the case appropriate for the verb in the relative clause. Since the word 'er' is 
the same in all cases this is mostly a technical thing and need not be worried 
overly about. We will, somewhat arbitrarily, separate all relative clauses in 
Norse with commas. 
1.8 The present tense 
So far we have only been discussing the present tense of verbs. The ON 
present tense actually corresponds to two forms in English. 
Víkingarnir koma. 
The vikings come. 
Víkingarnir koma. 
The vikings are coming.
When translating remember to use the most natural English form. 
1.9 Word order 
While word order in Old Norse is fairly free there are usually some things that 
are more normal than others. The normal word order in a simple sentence is, 
as in English: "subject verb object". Another common word order is "verb 
subject object". The greatest emphasis in a sentence is usually on the first 
word. Thus, if we want to draw special attention to the object we can use 
"object verb subject". Other word-order schemes are usually reserved for 
elaborate poetry. 
Where do you put the negating word "eigi"? Those examples will illustrate the 
variety of normal structures. Do not be overwhelmed by this, there is little 


=== PAGE 20 ===

need to memorise every possible pattern, you will slowly become familiar 
with normal word order in reading the translation exercises. 
• Subject-verb-object 
o Hann sér eigi úlfinn. 
o Hann sér úlfinn eigi. 
• Verb-subject-object 
o Sér hann úlfinn eigi. 
o Sér hann eigi úlfinn. 
o Eigi sér hann úlfinn. 
• Object-verb-subject 
o Úlfinn sér hann eigi. 
All the legal sentences above have one thing in common: "The verb is always 
the first or the second word in the sentence." This phenomenon is known as 
V2 and is treated in more detail later in the course. 
Other adverbs are usually placed in the same way. 
2. Vocabulary 
2.1 Nouns 
maðr 
person, man, human being (declension described in 1.5)
Norðmaðr 
Norwegian (declines like maðr) 
Then two words whose declension we described in 1.4. 
hrafn 
raven
jarl 
earl 
The rest of the words given are regular strong masculine. 
bátr 
boat 
geirr 
spear 
Íslendingr 
Icelander
vargr 
wolf 
víkingr 
viking 


=== PAGE 21 ===

þjófr 
thief 
And for good measure we also list the names used in the lesson. You should 
never forget that names behave as any other nouns. They decline according to 
their declension group. 
Eiríkr 
Erlingr
2.2 Pronouns 
er that, which, who, whom
Also remember to memorise the masculine pronoun in plural. 
Nom. þeir (they)
Acc. þá (them) 
2.3 Verbs 
The verbs from lesson one are reiterated here for easy reference. 
hafa, hefi 
have, hold, wear 
hata, hata 
hate 
heita, heiti 
be called 
deyja, dey 
die 
bíða, bíð 
wait 
koma, køm 
come 
mæla, mæli 
talk 
sjá, sé 
see 
vega, veg 
slay 


=== PAGE 22 ===

segja, segi 
says 
taka, tek 
take 
sjá (irregular) 
see 
vera (irregular) 
be 
á 
owns (only form of this verb yet presented)
2.4 Adverbs 
nú 
now
þar 
there
2.5 A greeting 
The following forms can be used as greetings. This is actually an adjective 
that is declining according to gender and number but we'll talk about that later. 
Heill! - to greet one man 
Heil! - to greet one woman 
Heilir! - to greet a group of men 
Heilar! - to greet a group of women 
Heil! - to greet a group including both sexes
2.6 Yes or no questions 
To change a statement into a question you use the word order 
Verb-subject-(object/complement) 
And often you add the word 'hvárt' in front. 
Hvárt er hann hér?
Er hann hér? 


=== PAGE 23 ===

But it's not good fashion to answer a yes or no question with yes or no! That's 
almost never done in the Old Icelandic texts. Instead you just repeat the 
question as a statement. 
Question: Hvárt er hann hér?
Answer: Hann er hér. 
Oh, alright, we can tell you the words: 
já 
yes
nei 
no
2.7 Sample sentences 
1. Norðmenn hata Íslendinga. 
o Subject: Norðmenn [nominative, plural, without article] 
o Object: Íslendinga [accusative, plural, without article] 
o Meaning: Norwegians hate Icelanders. 
2. Hatar konungrinn úlfa. 
o Subject: konungrinn [nominative, singular, with article] 
o Object: úlfa [accusative, plural, without article] 
o Meaning: The king hates wolfs. 
3. Þeir eru Norðmenn. 
o Subject: þeir [nominative, plural] 
o Complement: Norðmenn [nominative, plural, without 
article] 
o Meaning: They are Norwegians. 
4. Brandrinn, er hann á, heitir Tyrfingr. 
o Subject in main sentence: brandrinn [nominative, singular, 
with article] 
o Complement in main sentence Tyrfingr [nominative, 
singular, proper name] 
o Subject in relative clause: hann [nominative, singular] 
o Object in relative clause: er [accusative, singular] 
o Meaning: The sword which he has is called Tyrfingr. 
5. Vit höfum hjálma. 
o Subject: vit [nominative, dual] 
o Object: hjálma [accusative, plural] 
o Meaning: We two have (are wearing) helmets. 
3. Exercises 


=== PAGE 24 ===

3.1 Translate the phrases into English 
• Sjá jarlarnir konungana. 
• Álfrinn á knífa. 
• Úlfar heita ok vargar. 
• Baugana sjá menninir. 
• Hrafnarnir deyja. 
3.2 Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
• The raven sees a hawk. 
• The king hates thieves. 
• A viking is called Erlingr. 
• The earls are called Erlingr and Eiríkr. 
• You (pl.) are coming. 
3.3 Translate the text into English 
Note: As our vocabulary and knowledge of grammar expands we will find 
better things to do with our exercises than killing Óláfr. 
Norðmenn hafa konung; hann heitir Óláfr. Maðr heitir Eiríkr; hann er jarl ok 
víkingr. Óláf hatar Eiríkr. Óláfr á bát. Hann heitir Ormr. Nú sér Eiríkr bátinn. 
Segir hann: "Hér er bátrinn, er Óláfr á." Eiríkr hatar Óláf en hann tekr eigi 
bátinn, er Óláfr á. Hann bíðr. Óláfr kømr. Eiríkr segir: "Nú deyr þú, Óláfr 
konungr! Ek veg þik!" ok vegr Óláf. Óláfr segir "Þú vegr mik! Ek dey! Á! Á! 
(exclamation of pain) 
3.4 Translate the text into Old Norse 
A man is called Eiríkr. He owns (some) helmets, (some) boats and a spear. He 
is a viking. He kills people and takes boats. But Eiríkr is not a thief. Thieves 
don't kill. Now Eiríkr sees Óláfr and the Serpent. He kills Óláfr and takes the 
Serpent. 
3.5 Translate the play into English 
[Óláfr bíðr.] 
Óláfr: Ek sé mann! 
[maðr kømr] 
Maðr: Heill Óláfr konungr! Ek heiti Eiríkr ok ek em Íslendingr. 
Óláfr: Heill Eiríkr! 
Eiríkr: Hvárt sér þú orminn þar, konungr? 
Óláfr: Eigi sé ek orm. 
Eiríkr: En hann er hér! 


=== PAGE 25 ===

[nú sér Óláfr orminn] 
Óláfr: Ormr! Ek sé orm! 
Ormr: Óláfr! Ek sé Óláf! 
Eiríkr: Segir ormrinn "Óláfr"? 
Ormr: Nei. Ormar mæla eigi. 
[Óláfr ok Eiríkr flýja] 
3.6 Translate the play into English 
[Eiríkr, þjófr ok víkingr, sér Orm, bát er Óláfr á] 
Eiríkr: "Þar er bátr!" 
[Haukr, Íslendingr, mælir] 
Haukr: "Óláfr á bátinn." 
[Óláfr kømr] 
Óláfr: "Menn sé ek!" 
Eiríkr ok Haukr: "Vit erum hér." 
Óláfr: "Hvárt takið þit bátinn?" 
Eiríkr ok Haukr: "Vit tökum hann eigi." 
Óláfr: "Ormr heitir bátrinn. Ek á Orm" 
[Eiríkr ok Haukr kalla] 
E & H: "Úlfr! Úlfr! Þar er úlfr!" 
Óláfr: "Úlfr? Ek hata úlfa!" 
[Úlfr, Norðmaðr ok þjófr, kømr] 
Óláfr: "Ek sé eigi úlf. Hvárt er hér úlfr?" 
Úlfr: "Hér em ek, Óláfr konungr." 
[Eiríkr, Haukr ok Úlfr taka bátinn ok flýja] 
Óláfr: "Þjófar! Ek hata þjófa!" 
E, H & Ú: "Vér erum víkingar, vér höfum bát er heitir Ormr!" 
4. Looking at real texts 
4.1 Half a stanza by Snorri Sturluson 
Drífr handar hlekkr 
þar er hilmir drekkr. 
Mjök er brögnum bekkr
blíðskálar þekkr. 


=== PAGE 26 ===

This half-stanza will not look recognisable to you, indeed it shouldn't, it is a 
complicated poetic passage. But we will apply the principles set forth earlier 
[The Norse and English tongues] to help us with individual words. 
Some we can guess at without thought; 'handar' looks like it's a cognate of 
'hand' and 'drífr' could be a cognate of 'drive'. We are right on both accounts; 
'handar' means 'of hand' but while 'drífr' is indeed related to 'drive' in this case 
it means 'snows'. Compare with the English word '(snow)drift'. 
The next word is 'hlekkr'. Doesn't look familiar. But English dropped all h's in 
front of consonants, maybe if we change it to 'lekkr'. Looks better but we need 
to do more. The cluster 'nk' was frequently assimilated to 'kk' in Old Norse, 
maybe we need to reverse such a change. Then we've got 'lenkr'. Of course 
English doesn't have r as a grammatical ending, out it goes. New result 'lenk'. 
Still not an English word but let's remember that vowels are more prone to 
change than consonants. If we change the 'e' to an 'i' then we've finally made it 
to 'link' which is the right word. 
It's a good and correct guess that 'þar' means 'there'. In this context 'þar er' 
means 'where'. 
What might 'hilmir' be? No way to figure that one out, it means 'king'. The 
word is related to 'hjálmr' and refers to the fact that kings tend to bear helmets. 
Then there's 'drekkr'. We apply the same rules as before; Norse 'kk' can be 
English 'nk' and English doesn't have 'r' as a grammatical ending. Then we've 
got 'drenk'. Maybe if we change the vowel to 'i' as before. Hocus-pocus we've 
got 'drink' which is correct. More specifically 'drekkr' means 'drinks'. 
Let's look at that first sentence in toto. 
"Drífr handar hlekkr þar er hilmir drekkr." 
The subject is 'handar hlekkr' which means 'link of the hand'. And what does 
_that_ mean? It is a poetic paraphrase for 'gold'. The verb is 'drífr' which 
means 'snows'. Then 'þar er' means 'where', 'hilmir' means 'king' and 'drekkr' 
means 'drinks'. 
"(The) link of the hand [gold] snows where (the) king drinks." 
This sentence is quite typical of Norse court poetry; praise of the king's 
generosity in florid language. 
Let's look at the second sentence. 
The word 'mjök' means 'very'. The English cognate is 'much'. You already 
know that 'er' can mean 'is'. Such is the case here. The word 'brögnum' doesn't 
have an English cognate. It means 'for men' and is a poetic word. 
Then there's 'bekkr'. In with the n, out with the r! We've got 'benk'. Hmm... 
The correct cognate is 'bench' and the meaning is the same. 
The word-form 'blíðskálar' is made out of 'blíð' and 'skálar'. The first is an 
adjective cognate to English 'blithe'. The second is the possessive form of 
'skál' which means 'bowl'. Modern Scandinavians can often be heard shouting 
this word. Skál! Skål! Toast! 
Last word: 'þekkr'. Once more we change 'kk' into 'nk' and get 'thenk'. The 
correct cognate is 'thank' but the word means 'comfortable' rather than 
'thankful'. 


=== PAGE 27 ===

If we draw together the second sentence. 
"Mjök er brögnum bekkr blíðskálar þekkr." 
Meaning: "The bench of the blithe bowl is very comfortable for men." 
And who doesn't like sitting and drinking... 
In summary we could guess correctly at the meaning of many words: 'handar, 
drekkr, blíð, hlekkr, bekkr' but we also had some whose cognates didn't help 
us much: 'drífr, þekkr'. This is quite typical. 
Do not rely on cognate trickery but use it, where it applies, as an aid to 
memory. 
4.2 Two half-strophes from the Sigdrífumál 
- - - 
Heill Dagr! 
Heilir Dags synir!
Heil Nótt ok nipt!"
- - - 
- - - 
Heilir Æsir! 
Heilar Ásynjur! 
Heil sjá in fjölnýta fold!"
- - - 
Compare the greeting carefully with chapter 2.5; notice how it changes 
according to gender and number. 
"Hail, Day! 
Hail, Day's sons! 
Hail, Night and [her] sister!" 
"Hail, Æsir (gods)! 
Hail, Ásynjur (goddesses)! 
Hail, bountiful earth!" 
 


=== PAGE 28 ===

Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson Three 
by Haukur Þorgeirsson and Óskar Guðlaugsson 
1. Miscellany 
1. Spelling 
2. Grammar 
1. Adjectives - indefinite form 
2. Usage - accusative with infinitive 
3. Usage - auxiliary verbs 
4. The masculine article 
3. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Pronouns 
3. Adjectives 
4. Verbs 
5. Adverbs 
6. Conjunctions 
4. Exercises 
1. Translate the phrases into English 
2. Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
3. Translate the text into English 
4. Translate the text into Old Norse 
5. Looking at real texts 
1. A strophe from the Völuspá 
0. Miscellany 
0.1 Spelling 
When the Latin alphabet was introduced to write Old Norse the spelling used 
was not very consistent and not very precise. To improve readability the 
spelling of the preserved manuscripts is usually "corrected" in modern 
editions. For example, there are few manuscripts that distinguish between 
short and long vowels but this distinction is, as a rule, made now when Old 
Icelandic texts are published. 
The spelling used in this course is the standardised spelling used in the 
"Íslenzk fornrit" edition of the sagas. That spelling, in turn, is based on 
suggestions from a 12th century treatise called The First Grammatical Treatise, 
because it is the first of four in its manuscript. 


=== PAGE 29 ===

There are two exceptions to this. What we here write as 'ö' should be an o with 
a tail and what we here write as 'oe' should be an oe-ligature. This is due to 
letter code difficulties. 
1. Grammar 
1.1 Adjectives - indefinite form 
In Modern English an adjective, such as 'fresh' will have exactly the same 
form no matter what its grammatical context is. This was not so in Middle 
English. Let's look at a part of Chaucer's description of the Squire. 
Embrouded was he, as it were a meede 
Al ful of fresshe floures, whyte and reede.
Syngynge he was, or floytynge, al þe day;
He was as fressh as is þe monþ of May. 
We see that two forms of the same adjective occur; 'fressh' and 'fresshe'. The 
first form goes with 'he' and the second with 'floures'. We could guess, 
correctly, that the Middle English adjective has a plural ending of 'e'. We have 
more examples of this above. The flowers are 'whyte' and 'reede' whereas the 
meadow is 'ful' of them. 
After this sidestep it should come as no surprise to you that in Old Norse 
adjectives have different forms depending on the number and case of the noun 
they describe. Their form also depends on the gender of the noun and whether 
it is definite or indefinite (explained below). The masculine indefinite 
declension is exemplified here. 
 
Sg. 
Pl. 
Nom. 
reiðr 
reiðir
Acc. 
reiðan 
reiða
The word 'reiðr' means 'angry'. As always you must memorise the table. 
We will immediately give examples of the usage. Note that the adjective can 
come either in front of the noun or behind it. Both types of usage are natural. 
Hér eru reiðir menn. 
Here are (some) angry people. 
Hann sér reiðan mann. 
He sees an angry person. 


=== PAGE 30 ===

Óláfr er maðr reiðr. 
Olaf is an angry person. 
Note carefully, however, that ON has a separate declension for adjectives that 
apply to nouns with a definite article. That is called the definite declension, 
while the one presented here is the indefinite. Be careful thus, not to use the 
forms above with a definite noun, for that is (under normal circumstances) 
wrong. 
The definite declension of adjectives is not presented here yet, since it is 
modelled on a noun declension not yet introduced (the weak one); the 
indefinite forms above, however, are similar to the declensions of strong 
masculine nouns and various pronouns, all of which are being presented now. 
We will have to make do with only indefinite adjective forms for a while. 
1.2 Usage - accusative with infinitive 
Having learnt infinitive forms of verbs and accusative forms of some nouns, 
we're ready for a very useful sentence construction. First, let's take a look of 
the English equivalent. 
I saw him come.
He sees it fly. 
This construction, usually with a main verb meaning to see, watch, hear, feel, 
sense, etc, indicates that the subject sees/hears/senses the object performing an 
action, which is put into the infinitive form (without any marker). ON 
examples: 
Ek sé Óláf konung koma. 
I see King Olaf come. 
Vér sjám manninn kalla. 
We see the man shout. 
Hann heyrir drauginn mæla. 
He hears the ghost speak.
Modern English speakers will often say "I see it coming." instead of "come." 
The ON construction may be translated either way. 
1.3 Usage - auxiliary verbs 
ON has much in common with English in its use of auxiliaries. To begin with, 
some examples of English auxiliary constructions with infinitive: 
It wants to go. 
He has to go. 


=== PAGE 31 ===

The man does see. 
Birds can fly. 
The dogs must leave.
The beast will sleep.
The auxiliary verbs are the ones that conjugate, 'want', 'can', etc, always 
coming first in an English sentence (but not necessarily in ON). The other 
verbs are all in infinitive. 
Note how some of the infinitives are marked with 'to', but some not. This is a 
feature of English as well as ON. It is inherent in the auxiliaries themselves, if 
the following infinitive is marked or not. Among the auxiliaries above only 
'want' and 'have' take a marker. ON verbs that have no infinitive marker, are 
easily recognized because they all belong to a special conjugation group. 
Below you will learn 'vilja', meaning 'want', which is one of those "special" 
auxiliaries. 
Konungrinn vill vega mennina. 
The king wants to kill the men.
Þeir vilja taka hestinn. 
They want to take the horse. 
Ek vil mæla. 
I want to speak. 
Eta vil ek eigi. 
I don't want to eat. 
1.4 The masculine article 
It may annoy speakers of many languages that the definite article is attached 
to the end of words rather than being a seperate word in front. It may be some 
consolation that it is originally a separate word. Its declension (in the cases 
and gender we have learnt so far) follows: 
 
sg
pl 
nom inn inir
acc inn ina
When we tack the article on to words it sometimes appears in its full majesty: 
maðr + inn = maðrinn 


=== PAGE 32 ===

menn + inir = menninir
But if the noun ends with a vowel or 'r' the 'i' of the article is dropped: 
ormar + inir = ormarnir
orma + ina = ormana 
And now a masculine noun from a declension group (the weak one) which 
you haven't learnt. 
(nom sg) hani + inn = haninn 
(acc sg) hana + inn = hanann
Though it is a separate word, 'inn' cannot be freely put in front of a word as an 
article; it always follows the noun (with some important exceptions to be 
learnt later). 
2. Vocabulary 
2.1 Nouns 
matr 
food (always in singular)
fiskr 
fish 
ostr 
cheese 
Names: 
Svartr 
Kormákr
2.2 Pronouns 
There is a group of pronouns called 'indefinite' pronouns; here are two useful 
ones: 
allr 
all, whole 
margr many, multitudinous 


=== PAGE 33 ===

As said above, many pronouns decline like the indefinite adjectives that have 
been presented. Thus, 'allr' is declined (in masculine): 
 
sg 
pl 
nom allr allir
acc allan alla 
Exactly like the adjectives above. 
But since 'allr' is available both in singular and plural, how would each 
translate in English? The plural form translates directly to the English cognate 
'all', while the singular means 'all of', 'whole'. Examples: 
Allir menninir eru norskir. 
All the men are Norwegian.
Hann sér allan manninn 
He sees all of the man. 
'Margr' declines in the same way. Its singular form means 'one of many', while 
the plural means 'many'. To explain the singular, consider this example: 
Margr maðr á hest. 
Many a man has got a horse.
What students should perhaps realize, is that there is little difference between 
these so-called pronouns on the one hand, and adjectives on the other. For 
other adjectives can stand independently just as these pronouns can; examples: 
Allir eru glaðir. 
All are happy. 
Hræddir eru ok ragir. Scared [ones] are also cowardly.
Dauðir sjá dauða. 
Dead [ones] see dead [ones]. 
Ef blindr leiðir blindan falla báðir í gryfju. 
If a blind [one] guides a blind [one], both fall into a pit.
However, traditional grammar defines these so-called pronouns as such, and 
other adjectives as such; we will adhere to this system in our lessons, in order 
not to confuse students refer to other sources. 
Regarding word order, adjectives usually postcede personal pronouns; thus: 
Ek et hann allan. I eat all of it.
2.3 Adjectives 


=== PAGE 34 ===

danskr 
Danish 
dauðr 
dead 
góðr 
good 
hræddr 
afraid 
illr 
evil 
íslenzkr 
Icelandic 
norskr 
Norwegian 
reiðr 
angry 
ragr 
cowardly 
stórr 
big (note that the first r is part of the stem)
svangr 
hungry 
2.4 Verbs 
Regular verbs: 
eta, et 
eat 
veiða, veiði 
hunt/fish 
flýja, flý 
flee, run away 
spyrja, spyr 
ask 
svara, svara 
answer 
kenna, kenni recognize, know (a person, place, or object) 
elta, elti 
follow, chase 


=== PAGE 35 ===

heyra, heyri 
hear 
fara, fer 
go 
deyja, dey 
die 
Note that ON has different words for the English concept "know"; "kenna" 
above indicates familiarity, while "vita", mentioned above, is the "absolute" 
knowing, i.e. it means awareness of a fact or event. 
An irregular verb - vilja: 
This irregular verb, meaning "want", is the second in a small group of verbs 
with an anomalous conjugation (the first being "vera"), but also highly useful 
meanings. It is a cognate of English "will", and behaves in similar ways as 
that English verb (e.g. in auxiliary constructions, see 1.3 above). It conjugates 
thus: 
Infinitive: (at) vilja
ek 
vil vit/vér 
viljum
þú 
vilt þit/þér 
vilið 
hann/hon/þat 
vill þeir/þær/þau vilja 
2.5 Adverbs 
brátt soon 
oft 
often 
hví? why? (word-order: hví + verb + subject)
mjök very, very much, greatly 
'Mjök', being an adverb, can also be used with verbs, in which case it means 
'very much'. For example, 
Óláfr hatar mjök úlfa. Olaf hates wolves very much.
Another example, from a real text, Völuspá: 
Geyr nú garmr mjök. Now [the] dog howls greatly.


=== PAGE 36 ===

2.6 Conjunctions 
því at because (word-order: því at + subject + verb)
er 
when 
3. Exercises 
3.1 Translate the sentences into English 
Ragir menn sjá reiðan úlf koma. 
"Ek sé svangan mann taka ost." 
"Hvárt sér þú íslenzka menn koma?" 
Maðrinn er oft hræddr. 
Illir menn vilja vega góða menn. 
Allir vilja bátinn taka því at Óláfr á hann. 
Íslendingar eru eigi menn ragir. Þeir eru ok góðir en eigi illir.
Maðrinn veiðir fisk ok etr hann brátt allan. 
3.2 Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
"Do you two eat the whole cheese?" 
"We see hungry wolves chase the man." 
"The ravens want to eat all of him, for they are very hungry." 
King Olaf sees the thieves take the boat. 
"I see many thieves! I want to kill them all!" 


=== PAGE 37 ===

Olaf wants to kill the thieves, but they see him coming. 
As the thieves hear Olaf speak, they all flee. The king chases them.
"Many a thief wants to take the boat." 
3.3 Translate the texts into English 
Illr draugr vill vega Óláf konung. Hann eltir konunginn ok er hann sér hann, 
kallar draugrinn, "Óláfr, þú ert maðr illr mjök ok ragr. Ek hata þik, því at þú 
vegr góða menn." Óláfr er hræddr ok flýr. 
Svartr heitir danskr maðr. Hann veiðir oft fiska ok etr þá því at fiskar eru matr 
góðr. Svartr ferr ok veiðir marga stóra fiska er hann vill eta. Er Svartr veiðir 
fiskana, kømr maðr. Er maðrinn sér Svart veiða fiskana, segir hann, "Heill, ek 
heiti Kormákr." Svartr heyrir Kormák mæla ok svarar, "Heill. Svartr heiti ek 
ok em danskr maðr." Kormákr spyrr Svart, "Hvárt veiðir þú fiska, Svartr?" 
"Marga stóra fiska veiði ek, því at þeir eru góðr matr." Kormákr segir, "Ostr er 
ok góðr matr, Svartr. Ek hefi hér ost góðan. Hvárt vilt þú ost eta?" "- Ek vil 
fisk ok ost eta, því at ostr er ok góðr matr. Hvárt vilt þú fisk eta, Kormákr?" "- 
Fiskr er góðr," svarar Kormákr ok tekr fisk. Svartr tekr ok ost ok etr. Menninir 
eru mjök svangir. Þeir eta nú alla fiskana ok allan ostinn, ok eru brátt glaðir 
menn en eigi svangir. 
3.4 Translate the text into Old Norse 
A worm sees a wolf coming. When it sees the wolf, it says, "Sss - wolf, why 
do you come? I own the fish here, which you want to take." The wolf is not 
scared and replies, "hail worm, I'm a hungry wolf now and I want to eat fish. 
You have much fish (many fishes) there, which you aren't eating (don't eat)." 
The worm is angry and says, "I own all the fish there, wolf. Wolves who eat 
the fish all die (deyja allir)!" Now the wolf is scared, because an evil worm 
wants to kill it. "- You are an evil worm! You fish (hunt) much fish but do not 
eat it (them) all. We wolves are very hungry and don't have fish. We also want 
to eat fish, worm!" The worm sees the wolf flee. The wolf is very angry and 
shouts, "I hate evil worms!" But the worm does not chase the wolf, for it is 
happy but not angry. 
4. Looking at real texts 
4.1 A strophe from Völuspá 


=== PAGE 38 ===

In this course we use standardised Old Icelandic spelling, geared to the 13th 
century. In this format we would give one of the last strophes of Völuspá like 
this. 
"Sér hon upp koma
öðru sinni 
jörð ór ægi 
iðjagroena; 
falla forsar, 
flýgr örn yfir, 
sá er á fjalli 
fiska veiðir." 
This, however, is not what how the main manuscript of Völuspá, Codex 
Regius, reads. The same strophe is spelled in the following way in the 
manuscript (I change e with tail to æ and o with tail to ö). 
Ser hon upp koma avðro siNi iord or ægi iþia gröna. falla
forsar flygr avrn yfir sa er afialli fisca ueiðir. 
Lots of interesting points. 
• The manuscript doesn't distinguish between short and long vowels. 
• It sometimes uses capitals for double consonants. 
• It does not differentiate between i and j. 
• It does not differentiate between u and v. 
• It uses c for k. 
• The grammatical ending 'u' is written 'o'. 
• It does not split the poem into lines. 
• It uses capitalisation and punctuation in a way different from ours. 
• It divides words in a way different from ours. 
• It writes 'ð' as 'þ', 'd' or 'ð'. 
• It uses 'av' for 'ö'. 
In all those respects Codex Regius is quite normal. Indeed, the standardised 
spelling is by no means an average of the spelling systems in the various 


=== PAGE 39 ===

manuscripts. Rather, it is intended to write Old Norse in a way that 
distinguishes its different sounds. 
We can now look at the same strophe respelled into modern Icelandic. 
"Sér hún upp koma
öðru sinni 
jörð úr ægi 
iðjagræna; 
falla fossar, 
flýgur örn yfir, 
sá er á fjalli 
fiska veiðir." 
Not many changes because the spelling of Old Icelandic and the spelling of 
Modern Icelandic are based on the same basic system. You should note that 
the ending 'r' has changed to 'ur'. 
We have now shown you the same strophe in three different spellings. All of 
them are quite plausible and many more. The morale? When you encounter a 
text 'in the original Old Norse' be sure to notice which spelling is used. 
 
 
Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson Four 
by Haukur Þorgeirsson and Óskar Guðlaugsson 
1. Grammar 
1. Dative Case: Giving & Receiving 
2. Dative Case: Forms 
3. Word Order: Indirect Objects 
4. Verb Imperative 
5. Pronoun trick - We Olaf slay a worm 
2. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Adjectives 
3. Verbs 


=== PAGE 40 ===

4. Adverbs 
3. Exercises 
1. Translate the phrases into English 
2. Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
3. Translate the text into English 
4. Translate the text into Old Norse 
4. Looking at real texts 
1. A stanza from the Höfuðlausn 
1. Grammar 
1.1 Dative Case: Giving & Receiving 
Until now, we have been working with two opposing cases: nominative and 
accusative. By now you should understand clearly the concept behind them 
and the difference between them. Consider this English sentence, 
John tells a story. 
That's complete. It's clear to you that John is the subject and the story is the 
object; if it were ON, John would be in nominative form and the story would 
be in accusative form. 
John tells a story to Mary. 
John's still the subject, the story's still the object; but the new participant, 
Mary, serves an as yet unidentified role. Let's consider the following 
incomplete sentence, 
John gives the dog... 
As stated above, the sentence is not complete; we need to know to whom John 
gives the dog. So, 
John gives the dog to Mary. 
Again, Mary's a third participant in the sentence; but how does Mary relate do 
John and the dog? Again, before we answer that, let's consider what word 
order has to do with it; 
John gives to Mary the dog. 
To Mary the dog gives John. 
The first version is not obviously incorrect, merely unconventional; the 
second one is wrong, especially for our purposes, because it makes it seem 
like the dog is giving John away, and thereby being the subject. 
In any case, it is clear that Mary has a different role from the dog, and John 
clearly has a different role from both of them. We know that John is the 
subject and the dog is the object, so what does that make Mary? She's an 
object all right, but not in the same way as the dog. The dog's a direct object; 
it's being directly affected by John. Mary is an indirect object; she's merely 
being affected by John's actions involving the dog. 
The bottom line is, Mary's role is special, and it is practical to mark this role 
in a separate way. How does English mark this role? Usually, in sentences like 


=== PAGE 41 ===

the ones above, by fixing "to" to the indirect object. Note how the "to" would 
stay with Mary no matter how the word order got arranged. 
You might have figured out by now that we're dealing with a new case. You 
might also have guessed that ON marks this case with special endings, not 
merely with words like "to" and a special word order. This case is called the 
dative case; the "da" part of the word is the stem of the Latin word "give", 
which is the logic behind the term for the primary usage of the dative case is 
to mark the receiver of a "gift" (note, though, that "gifts" can also be thrown, 
shoved, transmitted, told, etc to their receivers). 
1.2 Dative Case: Forms 
Now that you understand the basic idea behind the dative, you require only the 
ON endings to start using it. 
First, the strong masculine noun declension: 
 
Sg 
Pl 
Nom 
dvergr dvergar 
Acc 
dverg dverga 
Dat 
dvergi dvergum
The -i ending there is characteristic of the dative in the strong masculine; 
some words in this declension don't have it (i.e. they are the same in acc and 
dat), e.g. "matr", but you should not worry about it now. The -um in the dative 
plural is characteristic of all declensions; it is thus important that you learn to 
recognize it. 
Next, the pronouns: 
 
Sg
Du Pl
Nom 
ek vit 
vér
Acc 
mik okkr oss 
Dat 
mér okkr oss 
 
Sg
Du Pl 
Nom 
þú þit 
þér
Acc 
þik ykkr yðr


=== PAGE 42 ===

Dat 
þér ykkr yðr
 
he 
it 
they (masc) they (neut)
nom 
hann þat þeir 
þau 
acc 
hann þat þá 
þau 
dat 
hánum því þeim 
þeim 
You may find it disconcerting that "hánum" has an -um ending (coupled with 
a minor stem change), similar to the plural of nouns; that is however 
characteristic of masculine pronouns in general. Since the article is originally 
a pronoun, its masculine form also features this, see a strong masculine word 
declined with the article attached: 
 
Sg 
Pl 
Nom dvergrinn dvergarnir
Acc dverginn dvergana 
Dat dverginum dvergunum
The main anomaly here is the plural dative form; you might, systematically 
speaking, expect something like "dvergumnum". Roughly speaking, that's the 
original form, but a combination like "mn" in that position would very easily 
get simplified to a more convenient "n"; which is what happened. 
Finally, adjectives in masculine: 
 
Sg 
Pl 
Nom reiðr 
reiðir 
Acc reiðan reiða 
Dat reiðum reiðum
Again, same pattern as with the pronouns, since the boundary between 
pronouns and adjectives is often not that clear in ON. 
As you have seen happen with verbs, endings like -um that have an u in them, 
will modify any a in the immediately preceding syllable, changing it to ö. This 
is called u-umlaut, or u-mutation ("umlaut" is a German term; "um" is a 
preposition meaning "about/around", while "laut" means "sound" - "sound-


=== PAGE 43 ===

about" if you like). Practically speaking, this means that you must take care 
with words containing an "a" in the root. For example, 
(Example noun) 
 
Sing
Pl 
Nom maðr menn 
Acc mann menn 
Dat manni mönnum
(Example adjective) 
 
Sing 
Pl 
Nom glaðr 
glaðir 
Acc glaðan glaða 
Dat glöðum glöðum
(Example pronoun) 
 
Sg 
Pl 
Nom allr 
allir 
Acc allan alla 
Dat öllum öllum
Note the "a > ö" changes where the -um ending is present (always in dative 
plural and In dative singular of masculine adjectives and pronouns). 
1.3 Word Order: Indirect Objects 
The most conventional order in ON prose, is to put the indirect object 
*before* the direct object. 
Maðrinn gefr konunginum bátinn. 
You should stick to this word order, though you can expect just about any 
word order to appear in skaldic poetry. 
1.4 Verb Imperative 


=== PAGE 44 ===

We commonly command or suggest for people to do something: 
Leave, find the car and then bring it here. 
All the verbs there are in "imperative". English verbs do not have any separate 
form for the imperative. ON verbs do not have any endings for the imperative, 
but rather the infinitive stem is used without the -a ending. For example, 
Veg þú orminn ok tak bauginn er hann hefir. 
An exception is verbs that end with -a in 1st person singular present, "kalla". 
Those keep their a in the imperative. 
Kalla þú mik Hauk! 
(From the verb infinitives "vega" and "taka") 
As can be seen, the pronoun "þú" (or "þit" or "þér") may be inserted and 
usually is, especially in spoken language. It need not be repeated for the 
following imperative verbs, though it may be done ("...ok tak þú bauginn..."). 
To command more than one person, the "-ið" ending (as in the verb active) is 
used: 
Vegið þér orminn ok takið bauginn er hann hefir. 
The imperative is seen in some greetings: 
Ver (þú) heill! be whole/healthy 
Verið heilir! be whole/healthy (plural)
Far vel! 
go well (fare well) 
But "negative commands" are also used, as in English 
Don't go! 
In ON, this is simply expressed by adding a negative adverb such as "eigi". 
Far þú eigi! 
1.5 Pronoun trick - We Olaf slay a worm 
In English we can say sentences like this: 
Olaf and I are slaying a worm. 
Old Norse has an idiomatic way of expressing the same: 
Vit Óláfr vegum orm. 
We could also have: 
Vér Óláfr vegum orm. 
Meaning: 
Olaf, I, and some other people are slaying a worm. 
Some more examples: 
Þeir Óláfr vega orm. 
Þit Óláfr vegið orm. 
Þér Óláfr vegið orm. 
2. Vocabulary 


=== PAGE 45 ===

2.1 Nouns 
hattr hat 
grautr porridge
Names: 
Einarr 
Fjalarr (dwarf-name) 
Gandálfr (dwarf-name)
2.2 Adjectives 
glaðr happy, glad 
langr long 
gylltr golden, gilted
2.3 Verbs 
gefa, gef 
give 
foera, foeri bring
finna, finn find 
hlæja, hlæ laugh
2.4 Adverbs 
þá then
3. Exercises 


=== PAGE 46 ===

3.1 Translate the phrases into English 
• Svartr gefr Kormáki fiska. Þá er Kormákr glaðr. 
• Menninir foera þeim góðan mat. 
• "Vit foerum góðum manni ost." 
• Svartr spyrr, "Hví gefr þú mér eigi ost, Kormákr?" 
• Kormákr svarar, "Ek gef þér eigi ost, því at ek hefi hann eigi." 
• Kormákr etr allan ostinn en gefr Svarti hann eigi. 
• Konungrinn foerir Norðmönnunum knífa ok geira. 
• Þá gefa Norðmenninir hánum langan bát ok gylltan baug. 
• Maðrinn gefr hánum hatt góðan. 
3.2 Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
• Then they give a golden ring to an evil king. 
• The dwarves bring the king a golden ring. 
• The king says "You are good dwarves." 
• The king takes the ring and gives the dwarves a big cheese. 
• The dwarves don't want any cheese, but they take it and go. 
• "Why do I give them cheese which they don't eat?" King Olaf asks the 
ghost. 
• The ghost replies "Olaf, you're a good man. But do not give cheese to 
dwarves." 
3.3 Translate the text into English 
Óláfr gefr Svarti hatt, kníf ok hest góðan. Hann segir, "Far þú nú, Svartr, ok 
finn bauginn er dvergarnir Fjalarr ok Gandálfr hafa." Svartr svarar, "En Óláfr, 
hví gefr þú mér eigi mat? Ek em svangr ok vil mat eta."Óláfr gefr hánum ost, 
graut, ok fisk ok segir, "Hér hefir þú mat. Far nú ok finn bauginn." 
Svartr etr matinn er Óláfr gefr hánum. Hann segir, "grautrinn er þú gefr mér er 
góðr, Óláfr. Þú ert góðr konungr." 
Svartr ferr nú ok finnr dvergana er hafa bauginn. Hann segir, "Dvergar, gefið 
mér bauginn. Óláfr konungr vill hann." Dvergarnir svara, "Vit viljum eigi gefa 
Óláfi konungi bauginn. Hann er illr konungr." Svartr er reiðr ok segir, "Gefið 
mér bauginn eða ek veg ykkr!" Dvergarnir eru eigi hræddir. Þeir hlæja ok 
Fjalarr segir, "Þú ert ragr maðr, Svartr. Þú vegr okkr Gandálf eigi. Vit gefum 
ykkr Óláfi eigi bauginn, ok far þú nú!" Svartr hefir eigi brand. Hann hefir kníf, 
en knífrinn er eigi stórr. Hann vegr eigi dvergana ok foerir Óláfi eigi bauginn. 
3.4 Translate the text into Old Norse 
Eric, a thief, sees some men eat. They eat good porridge, many fish, and a big 
cheese. Eric wants the food, for he is hungry. He says "Hail, I am hungry. 


=== PAGE 47 ===

Will you (use "þér") give some good food to a hungry man?" They reply 
"Take some food. We give it to you. But the elves are hungry too. Take some 
porridge and give it to them. Eric finds some elves. He brings hungry elves 
food, for he is a good man. 
4. Looking at real texts 
4.1 A stanza from the Höfuðlausn 
Again we practice our etymology but in a less verbose manner than before. 
A stanza from the Höfuðlausn: 
Beit fleinn floginn
þá var friðr loginn
var álmr dreginn 
varð úlfr feginn. 
Stózk fólk-hagi 
við fjör-lagi 
gall ý-bogi 
at egg-togi. 
The main etymological lesson here is that g inside a word is gone in modern 
English; resulting in a change of the original vowel. 
floginn 
flown
loginn 
lied 
dreginn 
drawn
feginn 
fain 
lagi (dative) lay 
Other cognates: 
álmr 
elm (bows were made of elm) 


=== PAGE 48 ===

stózk (middle 
voice) 
stood 
beit 
bit (bíta = bite) 
gall 
yelled (Old English "geall", the 'g' is pronounced as 
'y' in ME) 
egg- 
edge (Old English "ecg" was pronounced "edge") 
ý- 
yew- 
Words without English cognates: 
fleinn arrow
friðr peace
fjör 
life 
I have included most of the cognates in this translation but enclosed them in 
quotation marks when they didn't seem to fit the context. 
A flown arrow bit 
then peace was "lied" [broken]
the elm [bow] was drawn 
the wolf became fain. 
The folk-leader stood against 
a "lay" [blow] to his life 
a yew bow "yelled" [twung] 
at the "tow" [pull] of edges. 
 
 
 


=== PAGE 49 ===

Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson Five 
by Haukur Þorgeirsson and Óskar Guðlaugsson 
1. Grammar 
1. Prepositions and Case Usage 
2. Dative Case: Command 
3. Accusative Case: Qualifying 
4. Assimilative Verb Conjugation 
2. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Conjunctions 
3. Adjectives 
4. Verbs 
5. Adverbs 
6. Prepositions 
7. Pronouns 
8. Phrases 
3. Exercises 
1. Translate the phrases into English 
2. Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
3. Translate the text into English 
4. Translate the text into Old Norse 
1. Grammar 
1.1 Prepositions 
So far we have been managing entirely without prepositions. But prepositions 
are an important part of ON as well as English, and not using them calls for 
much unnecessary circumlocution and paraphrasing. ON prepositions, 
however, largely involve use of the dative case, which is why we have not 
started using them until now. 
Why would prepositions involve the dative case? Our first acquaintance with 
this case introduced it as a case for "giving & receiving". But the dative case 
has many different functions in ON. The reason is that ON's dative case was 
(and is, in Icelandic and Faroese) the final result of a fusion of many different 
cases. In the farthest "known" (projected by comparative linguistics) ancestral 
language of both ON and English, "Indo-European" (so called because it is the 
ancestor of most European languages and Persian and North-Indian languages 
as well), all those different cases served one specific purpose only. Four Indo- 
European cases served as the basis for the ON dative: 


=== PAGE 50 ===

· Locative: The case for marking places or objects where the subject of the 
sentence is positioned; associated with prepositions meaning 'in', 'on', 'at', etc. 
· Ablative: Marks places or objects whence the subject comes; associated with 
prepositions meaning 'from', 'out of', etc. 
· Instrumental: Marks objects that are being used in the verb action; e.g. a 
sentence meaning 'he weighed the book with a scale', would mark the word 
'scale' with the instrumental; English primarily marks the instrumental with 
the preposition 'with', but sometimes with 'by', e.g. 'he came by ship'. 
· Dative: Marks the indirect object, usually the receiver of a gift of some kind 
(whether negative or positive); English usually marks this with 'to', e.g. "he 
gave it to him" or simply by word order, e.g. "he gave the man a chance", 
where "the man" would be in dative. 
In Indo-European, those cases (supposedly) had separate forms, i.e. separate 
endings, for each of them. But ON had united all those cases into one form, 
while retaining all of those different uses for that single case. 
It may be evident by now why the dative case is so strongly affiliated with 
prepositions in ON. Most prepositions have meanings that would be 
associated with the locative and ablative cases mentioned above. 
You might wonder what case category prepositions like 'into' and 'onto' fit. 
While locative answers 'where?', and ablative answers 'whence?/where from?', 
the 'into' case would answer 'whither?/'where to?'. This case is called "allative" 
by grammarians, and is the opposite of the 'ablative'. Even Indo-European did 
not have a separate form for this case; instead, it was assigned to the 
accusative case. This is significant, because some ON cases involve 
accusative, and they are all essentially allative in meaning. 
From now on, prepositions are introduced in the Vocabulary section in the 
following format: 
með + dat with, by, using
Or that is, the prepositions are shown with a "+ [case]" following it. It is very 
important to note the case that a preposition takes, especially because a few 
ON prepositions may take either accusative or dative, with different meanings 
according to which case follows. These are cases of prepositions with either 
locative or allative meanings; compare English "in", locative, which would 
take dative in ON, to "into", allative, which would take accusative. Both are 
represented by the ON preposition "í", but the meaning differs according to 
the case that follows. 
1.2 Dative Case: Command 
Now that you have learnt how to mark the dative case in all words we have 
yet introduced, it is time to learn more useful ways of using it. One useful 
construction involves verbs meaning "tell" or "command". 
Consider this English sentence, 


=== PAGE 51 ===

I told him to stop. 
As opposed to, 
I gave him a watch. 
And then consider 
I told it to him. 
I gave it to him. 
The sentences both exhibit the same pattern, at close inspection. We already 
understand that the second sentence, involving giving, has an indirect object, 
and therefore a dative case. By re-arranging the sentence, the abstract "to" 
preposition pops up, which is a sure sign of the dative in English. "He" is the 
indirect object, the receiver of the "gift", and is marked with the dative. 
What we are interested in now, however, is that the first sentence, not 
obviously involving any "giving", merely "telling", behaves in the same way. 
"He" is also an indirect object, and is marked with dative. What does he 
receive? "To stop". Hardly a noun, but verb infinitives are tricky in that they 
often behave as nouns. Without dwelling on that, we have at least found that 
this is a significant "new" way of using the dative, although it is in principle 
the same as the "giving" usage we already know. 
Common English verbs that can function in this way are "tell", "command", 
"order", and others of similar meanings. 
The good news is that ON does the exact same thing. In ON, we know the 
verb "segja"; it means "say", but it also means "tell", since ON does not 
distinguish between those two meanings. Let's make ON constructions 
analogous to the ones above: 
Ek gef hánum mat. 
Is already familiar. Using the command-type construction, 
Ek segi hánum at eta. 
However, in examining 13th century Icelandic texts, it seems to us that such 
constructions with "segja" were not altogether usual, though not wrong. The 
idiomatic usage of the text writers was to use the verb "bjóða, býð" = 'offer'. 
Thus, they'd rather say: 
Ek býð hánum at eta. 
But Nordic men of authority often made "offers" that couldn't be refused; 
'bjóða' sometimes means simply 'order'/'command'. 
Evidently, verb infinitives can function like nouns in other dative contexts 
than commanding, both in English and ON. English says, 
I give him to eat. (usually elaborated to, say, "I give him something to eat") 
ON would say, 
Ek gef hánum at eta. 
1.3 Accusative Case: Qualifying 
There still remain some useful ways of employing accusative in ON. One 
common construction is what we off-hand dub "qualifying". Again, being 
closely related to ON, English has an analogous construction: 


=== PAGE 52 ===

I call him cowardly. 
In ON, both "him" and "cowardly" come in accusative: 
Ek kalla hann ragan. 
ON often uses the verb "segja" in this way: 
Ek segi hann ragan. 
Another use is with the verb "vilja", as English uses "want": 
Ek vil hann dauðan.    I want him dead. 
1.4 Assimilative Verb Conjugation 
Verbs that do not conjugate with a vowel ending, and whose stems have a 
long vowel (acutes, diphthongs, ae and oe) and end in 's' or 'n' never have an -r 
ending; instead, the -r assimilates to the 's' or 'n' and becomes an -s/-n ending: 
blása, blaes to blow
ek 
blæs 
þú 
blæss 
hann 
blæss 
skína, skín to shine
ek 
skín 
þú 
skínn 
hann 
skínn 
But verbs that end in vowels are of course not affected: 
reisa, reisi to construct, to raise something/someone (to vertical 
position) 
ek 
reisi 
þú 
reisir 
hann 
reisir 
2. Vocabulary 


=== PAGE 53 ===

2.1 Nouns 
skógr forest 
vágr 
small bay, cove 
hólmr isle, small island 
garðr palisade/stone wall, city, city-state, garden, yard 
haugr mound, dung, pile, grave (see below) 
eldr 
fire 
vindr wind 
vangr field (not farming), meadow, clear patch of ground
brunnr well 
heimr home, homeland, world 
oddr point, spike 
fors 
waterfall 
sandr sand 
• Norse people made great piles over the graves of important men. 
Ragnarr 
Hjálmarr 
Oddr 
Úlfarr 
Noregr 
Norway 


=== PAGE 54 ===

Geirshólmr "Geir's Isle" 
Geirshaugr "Geir's Grave" 
Heiðvangr "Clear Field" 
Skógarfors "Forest's Falls" 
Úlfarsheimr "Úlfar's Home" 
Hólmgarðr "Island City", a Nordic (Swedish) colony in Russia, now 
called Novgorod ("gorod" = "garðr") 
Austrvegr "Eastway" (Russia) 
2.2 Conjunctions 
ef 
if 
þar er where (relative)
2.3 Adjectives 
djúpr deep 
ungr young 
ríkr 
rich 
heiðr clear 
bjartr bright, fair (of light complexion and/or blonde hair)
sterkr strong 
víðr wide, extensive 
breiðr broad 


=== PAGE 55 ===

feigr doomed to die, "dead already", fey 
spakr wise 
2.4 Verbs 
sigla, sigli 
sail 
ganga, geng 
walk 
bjóða, býð 
offer (sometimes 'command', see 1.2)
sýna, sýni 
show 
búa, bý 
live in, inhabit 
brenna, brennr be burning 
blása, blæs 
blow 
falla, fell 
fall 
skína, skín 
shine 
standa, stend stand 
lifa, lifi 
live 
2.5 Adverbs 
meðan while 
svá 
so, such, then (immediately following)
heim homewards 
vel 
well 


=== PAGE 56 ===

sem 
as, like 
2.6 Prepositions 
í + acc 
into 
í + dat 
in(side) 
á + acc 
onto 
á + dat 
on (top of) 
ór + dat 
out of 
með + dat with, by, using; with, accompanying
2.7 Pronouns 
fáir 
(pl) few (note: "fám" in pl dat, not "fáum")
sumir (pl) some 
báðir (pl) both 
hvat? what? 
2.8 Phrases 
"gefa grið" grant/give mercy, spare, pardon (from death)
Example: "illr maðr gefr mér eigi grið." (an evil man gives me no mercy) 
Dictionaries will reveal that "grið" is a plural neuter, but do not let that 
disconcert you. It will not need to be declined to any form not known to you. 
Just use the phrase. 
3. Exercises 
3.1 Translate the phrases into English 


=== PAGE 57 ===

a. Úlfrinn gengr í skóginn. 
b. Úlfrinn gengr í skóginum. 
c. Eldr mjök bjartr brennr í garðinum. 
d. Ragnarr ferr með víkingum í váginn. 
e. Þar vegr hann úlfana með geirinum. 
f. Ragnarr kømr í Eiríksheim með bátinum. 
g. Með hánum eru fáir menn. 
h. "Hví eru sumir eigi glaðir?" spyrr Oddr. 
i. "Fám mönnum, er mik feigan vilja, gef ek grið," segir Úlfarr jarl. 
3.2 Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
a. A young man sails in the cove. 
b. He walks out of the boat and into the isle. 
c. The vikings wait with the earl in a big forest, in the isle. 
d. The man finds the vikings and the earl in the forest. 
e. The earl says: "Some men want me dead. Do you want so?" 
f. "That I do (so I want), earl. Here I stand and fall." 
g. "Few men do I spare. If you do not leave (go), I kill you." 
h. The vikings say: "Go home, or be doomed." 
3.3 Translate the text into English 
Oddr ok Ragnarr heita menn. Oddr er maðr ungr ok bjartr, ok sterkr mjök. 
Ragnarr er maðr mjök ríkr. Ragnarr á bát góðan ok langan mjök. Þeir eru 
báðir Norðmenn ok búa í Noregi. 
Ragnarr býðr Oddi ok mörgum víkingum at fara í bátinn. Þeir fara nú allir ok 
sigla. Þeir sigla í stórum vági. Ór bátinum sjá þeir hólm. Þar er sandr ok skógr. 
"Hólmrinn heitir Geirshólmr," segir Ragnarr Oddi. "Í skóginum þar er ok 
Geirshaugr, en þar býr Geirr, illr draugr." Þeir sjá ok vang mjök víðan ok 
heiðan. Oddr spyrr, "Hvat heitir þá vangrinn, svá heiðr?" "Hann heitir 
Heiðvangr. Þar blása vindar sterkir," svarar Ragnarr hánum. "Þar á ek marga 
hesta, ok eta þeir vel í vanginum. Í Heiðvangi er ok brunnr mjök djúpr," segir 
hann. Oddr sér fors breiðan ok spyrr, "Hvat heitir forsinn, er þar fellr?" 
Ragnarr svarar hánum, "Forsinn heitir Skógarfors, ok er breiðr mjök." Ragnarr 
sýnir Oddi vága, hólma, skóga, sanda, forsa, ok vanga, meðan þeir sigla. Oddr 
segir, "Þú ert maðr mjök spakr ok mælir vel, Ragnarr, ok kenni ek nú marga 
vága ok vanga hér í Noregi." 
Brátt koma þeir í Úlfarsheim, þar er Úlfarr jarl býr. Úlfar hatar mjök Ragnarr 
ok vill hann feigan. Er þeir ganga ór bátinum ok á sandinn, segir hann, "Hér í 
Úlfarsheimi býr Úlfarr, jarl illr ok ríkr. Hann gefr eigi góðum mönnum grið." 
Þeir ganga nú í Úlfarsheim ok sjá stóran garð. Ragnar maelir, "Garðrinn er 
mjök stórr. Hann er svá stórr sem Hólmgarðr." Þá svarar Oddr, "Eigi kenni ek 
Hólmgarð." Ragnarr segir hánum, "Þú ert ungr maðr, Oddr, ok eigi spakr. 
Hólmgarðr er stórr garðr í Austrvegi. Þar eru margir vargar í víðum skógum." 


=== PAGE 58 ===

3.4 Translate the text into Old Norse 
When Úlfar sees Ragnar coming with a young man and many vikings, he says, 
"Many fires burn in me, while Ragnar lives. I grant him no mercy if he does 
not leave (go) [out of] Úlfarsheim soon." The men are afraid, who are with 
him, as they hear him speak so. Úlfar takes a sword and a horse, and leaves. 
As they walk, Oddr asks Ragnar much (= many questions, use "mjök"). But 
Ragnar does not answer him. He says: "Úlfar comes soon. Do not speak, he 
wants all of us ("oss alla") dead." But Oddr and the vikings do not speak. 
They stand and are afraid. Now Ragnar also sees what they see. 
He sees Úlfar on a horse. The wind blows as he speaks: "You are all dead 
("feigir") men. I don't spare men like you." As he is coming, they see the fire 
[that is] burning in him. 
Oddr and the vikings flee. They do not want to die in Úlfarsheim. Ragnar sees 
them flee and shouts: "You are all cowardly! But now I flee too, for Úlfar 
grants no mercy." Then he flees with the men. Úlfar does not pursue them. He 
says: "Some men I do grant mercy - cowardly men." 
4. Looking at real texts 
4.1 A few words from the Heimskringla 
Þá varð Óláfr konungr reiðr mjök ok mælti bráðliga: "Hví mun ek vilja eiga 
þik hundheiðna?" 
varð 
became 
bráðliga 
angrily 
mun 
will (conjugated in lesson 8) 
eiga 
own, marry 
hund-heiðna dog-heathen, heathen like a dog
Then king Olaf became very angry and spoke angrily: 
"Why will I want to marry you {when you are} heathen like a dog?" 
4.2 A question and an answer from Brennu-Njáls saga 
Hann spyrr hvat þeim væri þar gefit.  
"Ostr," segja þær. 
væri gefit = was given


=== PAGE 59 ===

He asks what was given there to them. 
"Cheese," they say. 
4.3 Half a strophe from Helgakviða Hundingsbana: 
Hvárt eru þat svik ein
er ek sjá þykkjumk? 
Eða Ragnarök? 
Ríða menn dauðir! 
svik (plural noun) = betrayal, illusion 
ein = one, only 
þykkjumk = seem to 
ríða = ride 
Ragnarök = "the fate of the gods", the end of the world
Are that only illusions 
which I seem to see? 
Or the end of the world? 
There are dead men riding! 
 
 
 
Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson Six 
by Haukur Þorgeirsson and Óskar Guðlaugsson 
1. Grammar 
1. Umlauts 
2. Article Usage 


=== PAGE 60 ===

3. Word Order 
4. Reference 
2. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Pronouns 
3. Adjectives 
4. Verbs 
5. Adverbs 
6. Prepositions 
7. Conjunctions 
8. Phrases 
3. Exercises 
1. Translate the text into English 
1. Grammar 
1.1 Umlauts 
"Umlaut" is a feature of Old Norse, and other Germanic languages; it 
potentially causes the greatest difficulty to foreign learners, of all the features 
in the language. It may be best, in order to thoroughly tackle this phenomenon, 
to understand its origin, workings, occurrence, and function. First, perhaps, we 
need to understand the term; "umlaut" is a "nonsensical" (German) term that 
probably adds to the difficulty experienced by English speakers. In German, 
"um" is a preposition meaning "about, around" (just as the corresponding ON 
word); "laut" is a noun, meaning "sound". "Umlaut" means, roughly, "sound 
change/shift/mutation" (or, for better memorization, "sound-about"!), and is 
often called by one of those terms in English literature. 
The umlaut was, to begin with, a pattern of changes within the Germanic 
languages, where their speakers sought to reduce the bulk of the endings, by 
dropping them and replacing them with vowels of changed quality (the 
'quality' of vowels is simply their nature, like 'a' vs 'i' vs 'u', etc, while 
'quantity' is their length). Until then, the Germanic vowels systems are thought 
to have been simple, with (approximately) the 5 basic vowels as in Latin, 'a, i, 
u, e, o', and various diphthong combinations of those. Through umlaut, a 
vowel ending might be dropped, but its preceding stem vowel would be 
affected by it in a certain way, changing to a new type of vowel. This 
introduced many new vowels to the language, called the "umlaut vowels". The 
umlaut vowels in ON are 'y, ý, æ, ø, oe, ö'. In older Norse, the ON 'e' was two 
different vowels, one of which was an umlaut; but they merged to yield the 
ON 'e', which is then "only sometimes" a case of umlaut. 
There are three basic umlauts: a-, i-, and u-umlaut, according to the vowel of 
the disappearing ending which caused the sound change. They were not active 


=== PAGE 61 ===

all at the same time, but rather appeared in the order given above. A-umlaut is 
not important to us, and only one type of u-umlaut is significant. The details 
of those will therefore be left out here. 
I-umlaut caused vowels to become fronted, and in that way, drawn towards 
the 'i'. This umlaut is of great functional importance, because in many 
declensions and conjugations, the stem alternates between having it and not 
having it. In orthographic terms, these are the i-umlauts: 
a > e 
á > æ 
o > ø 
ó > oe 
u > y 
o > y 
ú > ý 
jú > ý 
jó > ý 
au > ey
We have some examples from verbs that we have been using: 
hafa > hef 
blása > blæs
koma > køm
róa > roe 
búa > bý 
bjóða > býð
And also in noun declensions: 


=== PAGE 62 ===

áss, áss, æsir 
maðr, manns, menn
The i-umlaut is a prominent feature in verb conjugations, some noun 
declensions, adjective comparisons, and finally, in word derivations. This will 
be encountered and further discussed in future lessons. 
The u-umlaut, then, has only one form that we need concern ourselves with: 
a > ö
We have seen this in the verb conjugation, especially in the 1p pl, such as 
"höfum" or "tökum". Also in the dative forms, where the -um ending is 
common, e.g "rögum mönnum". This is called "preserved" u-umlaut, because 
the ending that caused it is still present, making it easy to predict. 
Other types of u-umlauts, which need to be explained, are to be encountered, 
but since they occur in declension forms that we have not yet dealt with, they 
will be discussed later. 
1.2 Article Usage 
As it happens, a concept in one language seldom corresponds exactly to the 
same concept in another. In that way, the concept of the definite article in ON 
is by no means an exact counterpart of the same concept in English. Let's 
consider some of the special ways in which the ON article is used. 
To begin with, the ON article is used considerably less, overall, than the 
English one. In poetry, it's not used at all. As a rule of thumb, if you are in 
doubt whether to use the article when writing ON, do not use it. When 
translating ON to good English, you must thus be ready to add the article into 
your translation where you see it fit. 
Our definite article is a complex concept to define. Generally speaking, it is 
used to make a reference to something familiar to the reader, either from a 
previous sentence within the text, or from outside sources (i.e. the author 
presumes the reader to know it, e.g. "the Santa Claus"). An English sequence 
of introduction and reference might go like this: 
1. There is an earl in Norway. (introduction)
2. The earl is rich. (reference) 
If it were: 
2. An earl is rich. (another introduction)


=== PAGE 63 ===

The reader would be confused, because this would indicate another, wholly 
unrelated, earl, leaving the sentences irrelevant to each other. Continuing the 
text: 
3. The earl is called Ragnar.
Now we have another way to refer to the earl, apart from 'he' of course, which 
would normally have been used in the third sentence; but we'll leave personal 
pronouns out of this, for convenience. At this point, the language will find it 
preferable to refer to this earl by his name, instead of "the earl"; compare how 
we might continue: 
4. One day, the earl goes hunting.
5. One day, Ragnar goes hunting.
Having introduced the earl's name, we have reached a "third level" of 
reference. We might identify three such levels of "familiarity": 
1. unknown (indefinite article used) 
2. introduced (definite article used) 
3. known by name (name used) 
This is the English pattern. Applying this system to ON, we find slight 
differences; consider a similar sequence of introduction in ON: 
1. "Í Noregi býr jarl." (introduction) 
2. "Jarlinn heitir Eiríkr." (reference) 
Now we have reached the third level of familiarity with Eric, since we know 
him by name; from now on, we can refer to him by name: 
3. "Gengr nú Eiríkr í skóg."  
However, unlike English, we can also refer to him by his "title", but without 
an article: 
3. "Gengr nú jarl í skóg." 
This is very common in ON texts; it should be translated into English with an 
article. By "title" in this context, anything relatively specific is meant. "Maðr" 
will rarely be used in this way, but anything more specific, such as "sveinn" 
(young man) or "karl" (older man) will commonly be used for close reference, 
instead of names. 
1.3 Word Order 
We have hitherto stated, loosely, that Old Norse has a "free" word order. This 
is true, as opposed to English, of the relation between the "noun phrases" (= 
the noun with all attached to it, such as adjectives and prepositions, or = a 
pronoun). In English, the order of the noun phrases is a strong indication of 
their case, i.e. which of them is the subject and which the object (direct or 
indirect). ON leaves the word order free there, indicating the case by changing 
the endings of the noun phrase's components. 


=== PAGE 64 ===

'Syntax' is the study of word order. There is more to the syntax of a language 
than the relation between its noun phrases ("noun syntax"); going from noun 
syntax to verb syntax, we find that ON has a rigid set of word order rules, in 
the relation between the verb phrase and the rest of the sentence's components. 
We need to start dealing with this phenomenon's immediate implications. 
(Technically, the noun phrase containing the object is subordinate, or 
contained within, the verb phrase; for our practical purposes, that is 
irrelevant.) 
Consider these sentences: 
"The wolf walks out of the forest."  
"Then the wolf walks out of the forest." 
The order of the sentences is identical; we merely add "then" in the beginning 
of the latter. But this won't work in ON: 
"Úlfrinn gengr ór skóginum." 
"Nú gengr úlfrinn ór skóginum." 
Not *"Nú úlfrinn gengr ór skóginum." 
As we add the adverb "nú", the verb shifts in its relation to the other words, 
and "insists" on maintaining its position as the second component of the 
sentence, following the adverbial phrase ("nú"). 
In that sentence, the verb phrase is composed of only one word, "gengr". 
Consider a sentence with a more complicated verb phrase: 
"Nú vill Úlfrinn ganga ór skóginum." 
The verb phrase here is "vill ganga"; "ganga" is a verb infinitive, while "vill" 
is conjugated, and therefore called the "finite" verb. 
But you notice that in this sentence, only "vill" stubbornly maintains its 
position, while "ganga" maintains its relation to the noun phrases; thus, the 
verb phrase has been split up. 
A practical rule may be deduced, which, if well understood and thoughtfully 
applied, will result in correct word order in most cases: 
The finite verb within an Old Norse sentence must always be the first or the 
second component, while the rest of the verb phrase retains its relation to the 
noun phrases even if that involves splitting it away from the finite verb. 
This is admittedly complicated; but a student who keeps this in mind while 
reading ON texts, should get a feel for this. 
This phenomenon is called "Verb-Second", or "V/2"; all Germanic languages 
except for English remain V/2 languages today, more or less. The origin and 
inner cause of the V/2 phenomenon is not all too well understood by linguists, 
though their knowledge of its function will suffice for our practical purposes. 
The V/2 characteristics has different manifestations within the Germanic 
family, however, so speakers of German or even modern Scandinavian 
languages should not always trust ON to have the same rules of verb syntax as 
their native languages do. 
An important fact in the V/2 procedure is that conjunctions are not members 
of the sentences which follow them; consider these examples: 
"Menninir vilja flýja." 
"Svá vilja menninir flýja." 


=== PAGE 65 ===

"Því at menninir vilja flýja." 
"Svá" is an adverbial phrase, while "því at" is a conjunctive phrase. As can be 
seen by the finite verb's position in the third sentence, "því at" has no effect on 
its position; sentence-wise, the third sentence is identical to the first, but with 
a conjunction tacked in front (which doesn't count into the sentence). 
It is therefore important to note whether such "structural words" (like "þá" and 
"ok", etc) are conjunctions or adverbs; note that "ok", for instance, may either 
be an adverb (when it means 'also') or a conjunction (when it means 'and'): 
"-ok þú ert maðr feigr, jarl." (conjunction) 
 
"-and you are a doomed man, earl." 
"Þú ert ok maðr feigr, jarl." (adverb)  
 
"You're also a doomed man, earl." 
Also note that in a string of sentences which "share" some components, i.e. 
when the latter sentences omit one or more of their noun or adverbial phrases 
when it is clear that they are the same as in the first sentence, V/2 applies as in 
the first sentence, which may be confusing. Best displayed in an example: 
"Þá ferr hann, ok [þá] vegr hann marga menn." 
"Þá" is being omitted in the second sentence (after the "ok" conjunction), but 
it still affects the word order as if it were there. In the same way: 
"Ef maðrinn sér úlfa, [þá] flýr hann." 
Often the "þá" will be omitted from "if-then" sentences, even while the V/2 
effects of it remain. 
Direct speech is, for syntactic purposes, an adverbial phrase within the "frame 
sentence". A whole paragraph of direct speech can be the adverbial phrase of 
a "he says"-type sentence: 
"Maðr heitir Haukr. "Eigi em ek norskr 
maðr,"<speech>", segir Haukr. 
It cannot be 
 * "...", Haukr segir. 
since that would violate the V/2 rules just as much as 
* "Nú Haukr segir." 
1.4 Reference 
Strong masculine nouns: 
 
(without article) 
 
sg 
pl 
nom haukr haukar 
acc hauk hauka 
dat hauki haukum
(with article) 


=== PAGE 66 ===

 
sg 
pl 
nom haukrinn haukarnir
acc haukinn haukana 
dat haukinum haukunum
Stems that end in "consonant + 'n', 'r', 'l', 's'" don't add -r in nom sg: 
 
sg 
pl 
nom jarl jarlar 
acc jarl jarla 
dat jarli jörlum
Note u-umlaut: 'a' becomes 'ö' before endings with 'u' (such as the -um in dat 
pl) 
Irregular: 
 
maðr (man) 
 
(without article) 
 
sg 
pl 
nom maðr menn 
acc mann menn 
dat manni mönnum 
(with article) 
 
sg 
pl 
nom maðrinn 
menninir 
acc manninn mennina 
dat manninum mönnunum
Personal pronouns: 
 


=== PAGE 67 ===

1st person: 
 
sg dual pl
nom ek vit 
vér
acc mik okkr oss
dat mér okkr oss
2nd person: 
 
sg dual pl
nom þú þit 
þér
acc þik ykkr yðr
dat þér ykkr yðr
3rd person : 
 
(masc) 
 
sg 
pl 
nom hann þeir 
acc hann þá 
dat hánum þeim
(neut) 
 
sg
pl 
nom þat þau 
acc þat þau 
dat því þeim
Adjectives, indefinite (strong) masculine: 
 
sg 
pl 


=== PAGE 68 ===

nom ragr 
ragir 
acc ragan raga 
dat rögum rögum
Verbs: 
 
hafa, hef (have) 
 
infinitive: haf-a 
imperative: haf! (sg) hafið! (pl) 
 
sg 
pl 
1p hef-i höfum
2p hefir hafið 
3p hefir hafa 
kenna, kenni (know) 
 
inf: kenn-a 
imp: kenn! (sg) kennið! (pl) 
 
sg 
pl 
1p kenni kennum
2p kennir kennið 
3p kennir kenna 
kalla, kalla (call, shout) 
 
inf: kall-a 
imp: kall-a! (sg) kall-ið! (pl) 
 
sg 
pl 
1p kalla köllum
2p kallar kallið 
3p kallar kalla 


=== PAGE 69 ===

In some verbs with long vowels (acute, diphthong, 'æ' or 'oe'), whose stems 
end in 'n' or 's', assimilation of the -r ending occurs: 
blása, blæs (blow) 
 
inf: blás-a 
imp: blás! 
 
sg 
pl 
1p blæs blásum
2p blæss blásið 
3p blæss blása 
skína, skín (shine) 
 
inf: skín-a 
imp: skín! 
 
sg 
pl 
1p skín skínum
2p skínn skínið 
3p skínn skína 
Irregular verbs: 
vera (be)
 
inf: ver-a
imp: ver!
 sg
pl 
1p em erum
2p ert eruð
3p er eru 


=== PAGE 70 ===

vilja (want) 
 
inf: vil-j-a 
imp: (vil!) (N/A) 
 sg
pl 
1p vil viljum
2p vilt vilið 
3p vill vilja 
sjá (see) 
 
inf: sjá 
imp: sjá! 
 sg
pl 
1p sé sjá-m
2p sér sé-ð 
3p sér sjá 
2. Vocabulary 
This vocabulary section will introduce very few new words (specially noted), 
but rather only list all the words introduced so far (in lessons 1-5). 
2.1 Nouns 
(No new) 
<td<norwegian< td="" style="color: rgb(0, 0, 0); font-family: 'Times New Roman'; 
font-size: medium; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; letter-
spacing: normal; line-height: normal; orphans: 2; text-align: -webkit-auto; text-indent: 
0px; text-transform: none; white-space: normal; widows: 2; word-spacing: 0px; -
webkit-text-size-adjust: auto; -webkit-text-stroke-width: 0px; "></td<norwegian<> 
álfr 
elf 
bátr 
boat 
baugr 
ring 


=== PAGE 71 ===

brandr 
sword 
brunnr 
well 
dvergr 
dwarf 
draugr 
ghost 
eldr 
fire 
fiskr 
fish 
fors 
waterfall 
garðr 
palisade/stone wall, city, 
 
city-state, garden, yard 
geirr 
spear 
grautr 
porridge 
hattr 
hat 
haugr 
mound, dung, pile, grave 
haukr 
hawk 
heimr 
home, homeland, world 
hestr 
horse 
hjálmr 
helmet 
hólmr 
isle, small island 
hrafn 
raven 
jarl 
earl 


=== PAGE 72 ===

konungr 
king 
knífr 
knife 
maðr 
person, man, human being 
matr 
food (always in singular) 
oddr 
point, spike 
ormr 
worm, serpent 
ostr 
cheese 
sandr 
sand 
skógr 
forest 
úlfr 
wolf 
vágr 
small bay, cove, creek 
vangr 
field (not farming), meadow, 
 
clear patch of ground 
vargr 
wolf 
víkingr 
viking 
vindr 
wind 
þjófr 
thief 
Íslendingr 
Icelander 
Norðmaðr 
 
Einarr 
 


=== PAGE 73 ===

Eiríkr 
 
Erlingr 
 
Fjalarr (dwarf-name) 
 
Gandálfr (dwarf-
name) 
 
Haukr 
 
Hjálmarr 
 
Kormákr 
 
Oddr 
 
Óláfr 
 
Ragnarr 
 
Sigurðr 
 
Svartr 
 
Tyrfingr 
 
Úlfarr 
 
 
 
Austrvegr 
"Eastway" (Russia) 
Noregr 
Norway 
Geirshólmr 
"Geir's Isle" (made up name) 
Geirshaugr 
"Geir's Grave" (made up name) 
Heiðvangr 
"Clear Field" (made up name) 


=== PAGE 74 ===

Hólmgarðr 
"Island City", a Nordic (Swedish) colony in 
 
Russia, now called Novgorod ("gorod" = 
"garðr") 
Skógarfors 
"Forest's Falls" 
Úlfarsheimr 
"Úlfar's Home" (made up name) 
2.2 Pronouns 
(No new) 
See the reference in 1.3 for personal pronouns. 
allir (pl) all 
báðir (pl) both 
er 
that, which, who, whom
fáir 
(pl) few 
hvat? 
what? 
margir 
(pl) many 
sumir 
(pl) some 
2.3 Adjectives 
(No new) 
bjartr 
bright, fair (of light complexion and/or blonde hair)
breiðr broad 
danskr Danish 
dauðr 
dead 
djúpr 
deep 


=== PAGE 75 ===

góðr 
good 
glaðr 
happy, glad 
gylltr 
golden, gilted 
feigr 
doomed to die, "dead already", fey 
heiðr 
clear 
hræddr afraid 
illr 
evil 
íslenzkr Icelandic 
langr 
long 
norskr Norwegian 
ragr 
cowardly 
reiðr 
angry 
ríkr 
rich 
stórr 
big (note that the first r is part of the stem) 
spakr 
wise 
sterkr 
strong 
svangr hungry 
ungr 
young 
víðr 
wide, extensive 
2.4 Verbs 
New: 


=== PAGE 76 ===

elda, elda cook
á 
owns (only form of this verb yet presented)
bíða, bíð 
wait 
bjóða, býð 
offer; command 
blása, blæs 
blow 
brenna, brennr be burning 
búa, bý 
live in, inhabit 
deyja, dey 
die 
elta, elti 
follow, chase 
eta, et 
eat 
falla, fell 
fall 
fara, fer 
go, leave 
finna, finn 
find 
flýja, flý 
flee, run away 
foera, foeri 
bring 
ganga, geng 
walk 
gefa, gef 
give 
hafa, hefi 
have; hold; wear 
hata, hata 
hate 
heita, heiti 
be called 


=== PAGE 77 ===

heyra, heyri 
hear 
hlæja, hlæ 
laugh 
kenna, kenni 
recognize, know (a person, place, or object)
koma, køm 
come 
lifa, lifi 
live 
mæla, mæli 
talk 
sjá, sé 
see 
vega, veg 
slay 
segja, segi 
says 
sigla, sigli 
sail 
sjá (irregular) see 
skína, skín 
shine 
spyrja, spyr 
ask 
standa, stend 
stand 
svara, svara 
answer 
sýna, sýni 
show 
taka, tek 
take 
vera (irregular) be 
veiða, veiði 
hunt, fish 
vilja (irregular) want 


=== PAGE 78 ===

2.5 Adverbs 
brátt soon 
eigi 
not 
heim homewards 
hví? 
why? 
hér 
here 
meðan while 
mjök very, very much, greatly 
nú 
now 
oft 
often 
ok 
also 
sem 
as, like 
svá 
so, such, then (immediately following)
vel 
well 
þá 
then 
þar 
there 
2.6 Prepositions 
í + acc 
into 
í + dat 
in(side) 
á + acc 
onto 


=== PAGE 79 ===

á + dat 
on (top of) 
ór + dat 
out of 
með + dat with, by, using; with, accompanying
2.7 Conjunctions 
ef 
if 
en 
but 
er 
when 
ok 
and 
þar er where (relative)
því at because, for 
2.8 Phrases 
"gefa grið" grant/give mercy, spare, pardon (from death)
3. Exercises 
3.1 Translate the text into English 
Í Noregi eru margir vágar, sumir djúpir, sumir langir. Norskir víkingar sigla í 
vágana, í löngum bátum. Í vágunum eru ok oft hólmar. Í hólmunum vega 
víkingarnir menn. Þar eru ok haugar, þar er illir draugar búa. Draugarnir eru 
oft reiðir, ok hata alla menn. 
Í Noregi eru ok skógar víðir, vangar heiðir ok forsar breiðir. Í skógunum búa 
góðir álfar, en ok illir vargar. Menn er ganga í skóga eru oft hræddir, því at 
vargarnir vilja vega þá ok eta. Ef vargar finna menn í skógunum, eru menninir 
feigir. Í vöngunum eru hestar, er eta þar ok lifa vel. Í forsunum er falla eru 
margir fiskar, er menn veiða. 
Dvergar eru þar ok, er hafa gyllta bauga. Dvergarnir vilja eigi gefa mönnum 
baugana. 


=== PAGE 80 ===

Þar í Noregi búa margir menn. Sumir eru jarlar mjök ríkir, sumir víkingar 
sterkir. Fáir eru konungar, fáir eru illir ok fáir ragir. Sumir menn eru spakir 
mjök, ok mæla vel. Spakir kenna marga heima ok marga menn. 
Fiskr er norskum mönnum ("for Norwegian men") góðr matr. Þeir fara í 
vágana ok forsana ok veiða fisk. Svá elda þeir fiskinn í eldi, er brennr. Meðan 
þeir elda hann, mæla þeir ok hlæja. Ostr er ok góðr matr, ok eta menninir ok 
ost með fiskinum. Góðir menn gefa svöngum ost ok fisk at eta. Svangir eta 
allan mat, er góðir gefa þeim. 
Ragnarr er jarl spakr. Hann kennir Austrveg, heim mjök stóran. Í Austrvegi 
eru margir garðar, víðir skógar ok vargar mjök illir. Garðr í Austrvegi heitir 
Hólmgarðr. Fáir garðar eru svá stórir, sem Hólmgarðr er. Í Noregi eru eigi 
garðar svá stórir. Í Hólmgarð sigla víkingar er vilja vera ríkir. Því at í 
Hólmgarði eru margir ríkir. 
 
 
 
Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson Seven 
by Óskar Guðlaugsson and Haukur Þorgeirsson 
1. Supplement 
1. Alternative forms 
2. Grammar 
1. Genitive Case: Possession 
2. Genitive Case: Forms 
3. Article Usage with the Genitive 
4. Reflexive Pronouns 
5. 3rd Person Possessives 
3. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Pronouns 
3. Adjectives 
4. Verbs 
5. Adverbs 
6. Prepositions 
7. Conjunctions 
8. Phrases 
4. Exercises 
1. Translate the phrases into English 
2. Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
3. Translate the text into English 
4. Translate the text into Old Norse 


=== PAGE 81 ===

0. Supplement 
0.1 Alternative forms 
We have stated that the language taught in this course is "standardised" 13th 
century Icelandic. People using other material to supplement this course (or 
using this course to supplement other material) often find that their books do 
not always use the same spelling or form of every word. It is perhaps high 
time that some of those variants be discussed. 
To begin with it is difficult to "pin down" a language as it was at any 
particular time and location. We say that we're teaching the Icelandic 
language 13th century but even that is not all too precise - Icelandic 
underwent many changes in the 13th century. Some of our forms may reflect 
early 13th century language while others mirror that of the late part of the 
century. Perfect consistency is very hard to achieve (and is certainly not in 
evidence in any manuscript - even the same scribe would often spell the same 
word in more than one way) but we prefer to have some kind of standard. 
Thus our choices are arbitrary here and there and may not exactly reflect that 
of any other study material. Don't panic. 
That said the interested student may find a discussion of variant forms to be of 
some value. The variations can be grouped into two categories. 
1. Variations in space 
We have already mentioned that the West Norse language forms are different 
from those of East Norse. But how different are they? This question is best 
answered by providing examples. One of the better known East Norse texts is 
"The Legendary History of Gutland". It starts with those words: 
Gutland hitti fyrsti maþr þan sum þieluar hit. þa war gutland so eluist at þet 
daghum sanc Oc natum war uppj. En þann maþr quam fyrsti eldi a land Oc 
siþan sanc þet aldri. 
Translated word for word into English this produces: "Gutland found first {a 
man} that who Thieluar {was called}. Then was Gautland so bewitched that it 
{during days} sank and {during nights} was up. But that man put first fire on 
[the] land and since sank it never." 
Note that the spelling is that of the original manuscript. No normalisation has 
been undertaken. This is in line with the usual trend that Old Icelandic texts 
are normalised but other Old Norse texts are not - or to a lesser extent. This 
makes comparison with our "standardised" language more difficult but we 
will attempt it nevertheless. So here we provide those lines as they would look 
in our Norse Course spelling: 
Gautland hitti fyrst maðr sá sem Þjalarr hét. Þá var Gautland svá *elvíst at 
þat dögum sökk ok náttum var uppi. En sá maðr kvám fyrst eldi á land ok 
síðan sökk þat aldri. 


=== PAGE 82 ===

Most of the differences are insignificant differences between manuscript 
spelling and normalised spelling - but some of them are quite interesting. Let's 
take a better look at those: 
Old Gutnish Old Icelandic
þan 
sá 
daghum 
dögum 
sanc 
sökk 
The word "þann" is actually not as far from "sá" as it might seem. The 
declension paradigm of "sá" is like this: 
nom sá 
acc þann
dat þeim
gen þess
In essence, what has happened in Old Gutnish is that the accusative form has 
been generalised to include the nominative. As a side note it might be 
mentioned that the exact same thing happened in English. This pronoun is the 
origin of the English definite article, 'the'. The Old English paradigm was like 
this: 
nom se 
acc þone
dat þám
gen þæs 
The "irregular" s-form was thrown out in favor of the þ-forms to (eventually) 
yield "the". 
The next word on our list is "daghum", as opposed to "dögum". First we note 
that the 'gh' is a common East Norse way of spelling the "soft" g (see 
pronunciation guide). It also sometimes occurs in Icelandic manuscripts. In 
any case the difference between 'gh' and 'g' is merely one of spelling. The 
other difference is much more interesting. Instead of the umlauted ö-vowel the 
Gutnish text has the un-umlauted 'a'. This reflects a general tendency. The u-


=== PAGE 83 ===

umlaut effect, while remaining in full force in Icelandic up to the present day, 
was much less prevalent in other Old Norse dialects - and it is completely 
lacking from the dialect of Guta saga. 
The third difference is no less interesting. Instead of the Old Icelandic "sökk" 
we have the much more English form "sanc". Again we have not an exception 
but a general tendency. The assimilation of 'nk' to 'kk' happened to a lesser 
extent in East Norse than in West Norse. In this case English and Old Gutnish 
maintain the more archaic forms. Again the u-umlaut has not taken place in 
the East Norse form. 
There are many small, differences between East Norse and West Norse. One 
that might interest the English reader is that West Norse dropped the 'v' in 'vr' 
clusters early on but East Norse has preserved it to the present day. Where 
West Norse has "reiðr" East Norse had "vréðr" and Modern Danish has "vred". 
English has preserved this consonant in its spelling but dropped it in the 
pronunciation. The English cognate is "wrath". 
Now let's turn our attention to Old Norwegian. We already know that Old 
Norwegian and Old Icelandic are collectively known as West Norse. We 
might wonder what the key differences between the two dialects are. For the 
student of Old Norse the most visible difference is that Old Norwegian texts 
are usually published in their manuscript spelling - unlike Old Icelandic texts 
which are usually normalised. For the linguist the difference is mainly that 
Old Icelandic is in some instances slightly more conservative than Old 
Norwegian. 
One example where Old Icelandic is more conservative is in keeping the 'h' in 
the consonant clusters 'hr' and 'hl'. Those were dropped in Old Norwegian 
before the writing age. One stanza from the Norwegian Rune Poem illustrates 
this. 
Reið kveða rossum vesta,
Reginn sló sverðit besta.
(A wagon is said to be worst for horses,
Reginn forged the best sword.) 
You notice the alliterative triad reið-rossum-Reginn. This would be destroyed 
in "translating" into Icelandic since rossum would become hrossum. 
2. Variations in time 
No living language is static and Old Icelandic underwent many changes from 
1200 to 1400. Major changes include the merging of the phonemes ö and ø 
and æ and oe respectively. Both happened in the 13th century. 
ö + ø -> ö 


=== PAGE 84 ===

æ + oe -> æ
Other noteworthy changes include the "softening" of final 't' and 'k' in several 
common words. Thus: 
ok -> og 
ek -> eg 
þik -> þig 
þat -> það 
hvat -> hvað 
vit -> við 
-it -> -ið (neuter article)
The absence of ø and oe and the "soft" consonants in the common words are 
two features that can easily be used to differentiate between Old Icelandic and 
Modern Icelandic spelling at a glance 
The forms of many individual words changed with time according to arbitrary 
rules; we have had to decide in each case which form to use as our standard 
one. Our choices are not entirely consistant. In cases where this course gives 
another form than other grammar references you can rest reasonably assured 
that both forms are correct - though one may be older than the other. A few 
common variants are listed below. 
it - þit 
ér - þér 
hon - hón - hún
hánum - honum
ek hef - ek hefi
1. Grammar 
1.1 Genitive Case: Possession 


=== PAGE 85 ===

The fourth and last remaining case in Old Norse declension is called 'genitive'. 
English has the following relations: 
John owns an expensive computer. 
John's computer is expensive. 
Bill steals John's expensive computer.
The orthographic -'s ending here is one part of the English genitive. It is the 
characteristic role of the genitive to mark the owner of a following item. 
Words marked with the -'s genitive stand in the same position as normal 
adjectives, as can be seen above. 
In ON, the strong masculine nouns we have encountered so far are also 
marked with -s in the genitive singular; thus, the full singular declension of a 
word like 'hestr' is: 
nom hestr
acc hest 
dat hesti
gen hests 
In the plural, the ending is -a for all masculine nouns, and most other nouns as 
well: 
nom hestar 
acc hesta 
dat hestum
gen hesta 
Again, the article must be declined with the noun. Now that we have all the 
cases, let's see the full masculine declension of the suffixed article: 
 
sg 
pl 
nom inn inir 
acc inn ina 


=== PAGE 86 ===

dat inum inum
gen ins 
anna 
And combined with a noun: 
 
sg 
pl 
nom hestrinn hestarnir
acc hestinn hestana 
dat hestinum hestunum
gen hestsins hestanna 
There! Now you have the full declension of the normal strong masculine noun. 
We'll look at the full declension of our only irregular noun to date as well. 
 
sg 
pl 
nom maðr menn 
acc mann menn 
dat manni mönnum
gen manns manna 
1.2 Genitive Case: Forms 
Section 1.1 already has the forms of most strong masculine nouns. Here is the 
full declension of most of the personal pronouns encountered so far: 
 
'I' 'you'
'he' 
'it' 'we two' 'we' 'you two' 'you'
nom ek þú 
hann þat vit 
vér þit 
þér 
acc mik þik hann þat okkr 
oss ykkr 
yðr 
dat mér þér hánum því okkr 
oss ykkr 
yðr 
gen mín þín hans 
þess okkar 
vár ykkar 
yðvar


=== PAGE 87 ===

 
'they' (masc) 'they' (neut) 'they' (fem)
nom þeir 
þau 
þær 
acc þá 
þau 
þær 
dat þeim 
þeim 
þeim 
gen þeira 
þeira 
þeira 
The personal pronouns all have a special form for the genitive, often a very 
distinctive one, so extra attention must be paid here. Note that the 3rd person 
plural pronouns all have the same dative and genitive forms. The only 
pronoun not presented in this table is 'hon' (she), since we won't be using it 
just yet. The full declension of adjectives in masculine form: 
sg 
pl 
nom reiðr 
reiðir 
acc reiðan reiða 
dat reiðum reiðum
gen reiðs 
reiðra 
Note especially the plural genitive ending: -ra. To students' relief, the plural 
dative and genitive forms are the same for all genders, so make sure you learn 
them well. 
1.3 Article Usage with the Genitive 
In English "titles", such as: 
The king of Norway.
The lord of men. 
The sound of battle.
The keel of the ship.
There, the titled entity always has an article attached to it. However, if we change the 
titles to a different type of genitive, the -s marked one, the article disappears: 


=== PAGE 88 ===

Norway's king.
Men's lord. 
Battle's sound.
The ship's keel. 
But with titles, it is more customary to use the prepositional genitive (with "of" and 
article). In Old Norse however, the genitive is only marked with an inflection, where the 
same rule applies; i.e. no article should be attached to the "titled entity": 
Konungr Noregs. 
Drottinn mannanna.
But if this were to be paraphrased into a title with a preposition, we would have an 
article just as in English: 
Konungrinn í Noregi.
It is merely that such usage is not the norm in ON, unlike in English. 
1.4 Reflexive Pronouns 
When the object of a sentence is the same as its subject the reflexive pronouns come 
into play. In English it works like this: 
I see myself. 
You see yourself. 
He sees himself. 
We see ourselves. 
You see yourselves. 
They see themselves.
Old Norse, however, is content with letting its first and second person personal 
pronouns perform this duty. 
Ek sé mik. 
Þú sér þik. 


=== PAGE 89 ===

Vit sjám okkr.
Þit séð ykkr. 
Vér sjám oss.
Þér séð yðr. 
But when it comes to the third person it has a special pronoun. 
Hann sér sik.
Hon sér sik. 
Þeir sjá sik. 
Þær sjá sik. 
This 'third person reflexive pronoun' has the following declension: 
'himself/herself/itself/themselves' 
acc sik
dat sér
gen sín
It observably declines just as 'ek' and 'þú' do. This pronoun has exact equivalents in 
many other Indo-European languages that you may be familiar with. German has "sich". 
French, Spanish and Latin have "se". 
Let's have more examples of usage: 
Hann kallar sik konung. He calls himself a king. 
Þeir gefa sér góðan mat. They give themselves [some] good food. 
And other reflexive usage: 
Ek kalla mik Eirík. 
I call myself Eric. 
Vit teljum okkr Norðmenn. We consider ourselves Norwegians. 
Ek foeri mik brott. 
I move myself away. ('foera' = bring, move)
Hví foerir þú þik til mín? Why do you move yourself over to me? 


=== PAGE 90 ===

('til' + gen = [over] to) 
2. Vocabulary 
This lesson is light on vocabulary and exercises - for historical reasons relating to the 
composition of the course. 
2.1 Nouns 
þegn thane, freeman, subject of a king, "citizen"
sporðr tail of a fish or serpent 
2.2 Pronouns 
sik himself, herself, itself
2.3 Adjectives 
saðr / saddr sated, having had one's full
vándr 
evil, wicked 
fastr 
fast, firm, stuck 
3. Exercises 
3.1 Translate the phrases into English 
a. Hvárt etr ormrinn sjálfan sik? 
b. Menn konungs eru þegnar hans. 
c. Eigi er sporðr fisks matr góðr. 
d. Ragnarr vill vega orm; hann hefir geirinn með sér. 
e. Ragnar vegr orminn en oddr geirs hans stendr fastr í honum. 
3.2 Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
a. The helm of the dwarf is gilded. 
b. The earl's hawk sees itself. 
c. People do not eat the tail of the serpent. 


=== PAGE 91 ===

d. Ragnarr's spear is broad. 
e. The point of Ragnarr's spear is big. 
Sentences like the last one with "nested" genitives are actually not idiomatic in Old 
Norse. 
 
 
Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson Eight 
by Óskar Guðlaugsson and Haukur Þorgeirsson 
1. Grammar 
1. Present-Preterite Verbs 
2. Assimilative Nouns and Adjectives 
3. Bisyllabic Stems 
2. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Pronouns 
3. Adjectives 
4. Verbs 
5. Adverbs 
6. Prepositions 
7. Conjunctions 
8. Phrases 
3. Exercises 
1. Translate the phrases into English 
2. Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
3. Translate the text into English 
4. Translate the text into Old Norse 
1. Grammar 
1.1 Present-Preterite Verbs 
ON has a small group of verbs that conjugate in a special way. English has the 
same phenomenon, but less noticeable. The verbs are called "present-
preterite", because their conjugation for the present is imitative of the preterite 
(= past) conjugation. This has to do with a development or shift that is 
believed to have happened early on in the ancestral Proto-Germanic language. 
To put this all into context we will state that the Germanic languages have 
three kinds of verbs. They are all still represented in English. 


=== PAGE 92 ===

Strong verbs 
1. Preterite formed with ablaut (certain type of vowel change) 
2. Certain endings in the present (in English an 's' in third person) 
Weak verbs 
1. Preterite formed with a dental suffix (in English 'd' or 't') 
2. Certain endings in the present (in English an 's' in third person) 
Present-preterite verbs 
1. Preterite formed like the preterite of a weak verb 
2. Present formed like the preterite of a strong verb 
We'll demonstrate by comparing a present-preterite verb ('can') with your 
garden-variety strong ('come') and weak ('love') verbs. 
I 
come came
you come came
he comes came
I 
love loved
you love loved
he loves loved
I 
can could
you can could
he can could
Comparing the actual conjucations with the blurbs above we see that 'can' 
does not add an 's' in the third person of its singular present tense; just like the 
other verbs don't have an 's' in their preterite. We also see that it forms its 
preterite with a 'd'; just like the weak verb. The Old Norse cognate of 'can', 
'kunna', is also present-preterite. 
While the English difference in conjugation is minor, ON present-preterites 
are more divergent. We have learnt two irregular verbs whose conjugation is 
somewhat similar to this class of verbs, 'vera' and 'vilja'; they are not 


=== PAGE 93 ===

historically present-preterites but it may be practical to speak of them in the 
same context: 
ver
a 
 
Sg.
Pl. 
1p 
em erum
2p 
ert eruð
3p 
er eru 
vilj
a 
 
Sg. 
Pl. 
1p 
vil viljum
2p 
vilt vilið 
3p 
vill vilja 
The present-preterite verbs are some of the most useful and common in the 
language so you should be careful to learn their conjugation by heart. 
The first verb we'll look at is the auxiliary 'skulu' which is the cognate of 
English 'shall' and similar in meaning. 
skul
u 
 
Sg.
Pl. 
1p 
skal skulum
2p 
skalt skuluð 
3p 
skal skulu 
The change of vowels from 'u' to 'a' is not our everyday umlaut but something 
even more arcane called 'ablaut'. We'll look at that again later. 


=== PAGE 94 ===

Our next auxiliary verb does not have an English cognate but it is most similar 
in meaning to English 'will'. One of its primary uses is to indicate the future. 
mun
u 
 
Sg. 
Pl. 
1p 
mun munum
2p 
munt munuð
3p 
mun munu 
Note the anomalous infinitives, with ending -u instead of -a. The verbs 'skulu' 
and 'munu' are the only verbs in the language with this infinitive ending. 
In the Völuspá we have a lot of 'munu' where the seeress is speaking of the 
future. One example is "Baldr mun koma" which is easily translated as "Baldr 
will come". 
By now you may have noticed something characteristic about present-
preterites; in the singular, the only endings are -t in the 2nd person. In the 
plural, they have -uð and -u in the 2nd and 3rd persons. 
Our next verb has the same ablaut as 'skulu' but now our normal infinitive is 
back. 
kunn
a 
 
Sg. 
Pl. 
1p 
kann kunnum
2p 
kannt kunnuð
3p 
kann kunnu 
The meaning of 'kunna' is related to that of its cognate 'can' but there are some 
differences. While English 'can' means to be able to do something either 
through ability or circumstances, ON describes only ability. Also, English 
'can' is always an auxiliary, while 'kunna' can be a main verb with a simple 
direct object: 
Ek kann þat. I know [how to do] it, I can do it
One more verb for now, 'eiga' (own): 


=== PAGE 95 ===

eig
a 
 
Sg.
Pl. 
1p á eigum
2p átt eiguð 
3p á eigu 
You should already be familiar with its 3p sg form, 'á', which has been used 
already. The vowel change between 'á' and 'ei' is actually neither ablaut nor 
umlaut but don't worry about it (it has to do with a phenomenon called 
Verner's law). 
The verbs 'skulu', 'munu', and 'kunna' from above are some of the most 
common auxiliaries in the language, just as they are in English (substitute 
English 'will' for 'munu'). Just as in English, no infinitive marker is used with 
them when they are used as auxiliaries: 
You will go. but not **You will to go 
Þú munt koma. but not **Þú munt at koma
1.2 Assimilative Nouns and Adjectives 
It often happens in languages that a consonant assimilates to a neighbouring 
consonant. We have already seen some examples of this in the etymological 
ponderings: 
*benkr -> bekkr (bench) (the 'n' has been assimilated to the 'k')
*áhta -> átta (eight) (the 'h' has been assimilated to the 't') 
One type of assimilation is important in declensions; their nominative -r has 
been assimilated by the final consonant of the stem. This happens with three 
consonants, 's', 'l' and 'n', and only when the vowel of the stem is long. Let's 
look at some examples: 
*ísr -> íss (ice) 
*hólr -> hóll (hill) 


=== PAGE 96 ===

*steinr -> steinn (stone)
The complete declension of those nouns is as follows: 
Singular  
 
 
nom 
íss hóll steinn
acc 
ís hól stein 
dat 
ísi hóli steini
gen 
íss hóls steins 
Plural
 
 
 
nom ísar hólar steinar 
acc 
ísa 
hóla 
steina 
dat 
ísum hólum steinum
gen 
ísa 
hóla 
steina 
Quite simply, the nominative -r is replaced by one of the other consonants. 
Nothing else happens. 
Then there are adjectives with the same feature, declining thus in masculine 
indefinite: 
háss 
hoarse 
háll 
slippery
groenn green 
Sg. 
nom háss 
háll 
groenn 
acc hásan hálan groenan
dat hásum hálum groenum


=== PAGE 97 ===

gen háss 
háls 
groens 
Pl. 
nom hásir hálir groenir 
acc hása 
hála 
groena 
dat hásum hálum groenum
gen hássa hálla groenna
Take special notice of the genitive plural, where the assimilation occurs. 
Remember that the assimilation only occurs in words with long-vowel stems, 
but not stems of short vowels: 
gulr yellow 
vanr accustomed
Sg. 
nom gulr 
vanr 
acc gulan vanan
dat gulum vönum 
gen guls 
vans 
Pl. 
nom gulir vanir 
acc gula 
vana 
dat gulum vönum 
gen gulsa vanla 
1.5 Bisyllabic Stems 


=== PAGE 98 ===

Some strong masculine nouns have a bisyllabic stem; observe their pattern of 
conjugation: 
hamarr hammer (stem: hamar)
himinn sky (stem: himin) 
 
sg 
pl 
nom ham-ar-r ham-r-ar 
acc ham-ar ham-r-a 
dat ham-r-i höm-r-um
gen ham-ar-s ham-r-a 
 
sg 
pl 
nom him-in-n him-n-ar 
acc him-in him-n-a 
dat him-n-i him-n-um
gen him-in-s him-n-um
First off, 'himinn' is assimilative. What is happening in these nouns is that 
whenever there is an ending with a vowel in it, the vowel of the second stem 
syllable is deleted: 
(sg dat) hamar + i > *hamari > hamri
Note that bisyllabic names, such as Ragnarr or Einarr, completely ignore this 
rule and decline normally. 
Some adjectives are bisyllabic; they commonly have assimilation: 
gamall old (stem: gamal) 
 
sg 
pl 
nom gam-al-l gam-l-ir 


=== PAGE 99 ===

acc gam-l-an gam-l-a 
dat göm-l-um göm-l-um 
gen gam-al-s gam-al-la
2. Vocabulary 
2.1 Nouns 
áss 
ace, god, one of the Æsir 
íss 
ice 
þræll 
slave 
vagn 
wagon, chariot 
hamarr 
hammer 
himinn 
sky 
jötunn 
ettin, giant (mythological) 
drottinn 
lord (or usually, "the Lord") 
hringr 
ring, circle 
hundr 
dog 
níðingr 
villain, oppressor 
viðr 
wood 
 
 
Þórr 
Thor, the thundergod 
Þórshamarr 
Thor's hammer 


=== PAGE 100 ===

Ásgarðr 
Asgard, the world of gods (Æsir) 
Miðgarðr 
Midgard, the world of men 
Miðgarðsormr Midgard's Serpent (the serpent that encircles Midgard) 
Jötunheimr 
Gianthome (the mythological home of the giants) 
Vestrvegr 
"Westway" (west across the North Sea; the British Isles)
2.2 Pronouns 
annarr other, another 
hverr? who, what (masc)?
hverr each 
hinn the other 
'Annarr' is a bisyllabic pronoun, with an irregular declension: 
 
sg 
pl 
nom ann-ar-r að-r-ir 
acc ann-an að-r-a 
dat öð-r-um öð-r-um 
gen ann-ar-s ann-ar-ra
As happens in 'maðr', the sequence 'nnr' becomes 'ðr'. The main irregularity in 
the word is its sg acc form, 'annan', where we'd expect '*aðran'. 
'Hverr' declines like an adjective with j-insertion: 
 
sg 
pl 
nom hverr 
hverir 
acc hvern 
hverja 


=== PAGE 101 ===

dat hverjum hverjum
gen hvers 
hverra 
An alternative (old) form of sg. acc. is the more regular 'hverjan'. 
'Hverr' is the interrogative that refers to masculine nouns or persons. It can 
also mean 'each': 
"Hverr þeira segir þá öðrum..." Each of them then says to another... 
 
sg 
pl 
nom hinn hinir 
acc hinn hina 
dat hinum hinum
gen hins 
hinna 
Declines just like the article ending; in fact, it is just a modification of the 
pronoun from which the article is derived. 
2.3 Adjectives 
sjálfr (him)self 
írskr 
Irish 
slíkr 
such 
groenn green 
háll 
slippery 
heill 
whole, healthy, "hail" (greeting)
víss 
wise 
gamall old 
gulr 
yellow 


=== PAGE 102 ===

vanr 
accustomed 
2.4 Verbs 
gjøra, gjøri 
do 
aka, ek + dat 
drive 
hringa, hringa 
wind around (as serpents do) 
hjálpa, help 
help 
róa, roe 
row (a boat) 
leiða, leiði 
lead 
vernda, vernda 
protect 
reka, rek 
drive out, drive sth forward from behind (such as 
cattle) 
verða, verðr + 
nom 
become 
'verða' is followed by a compliment, i.e. a noun in nominative. 
The object of 'aka' is in dative rather than accusative. 
2.5 Adverbs 
aftr 
again 
saman together 
bæði 
both 
því næst then, thereafter, subsequently
né 
nor 
2.6 Prepositions 


=== PAGE 103 ===

við + acc by, next to 
um + acc about, around, through 
af + dat 
off 
yfir + dat over 
gegn + dat against, in front of 
hjá + dat by, with, in the company of
til + gen 
to 
2.7 Conjunctions 
at 
that 
svá at so [that]
"svá at" is sometimes contracted to "svát" 
2.8 Phrases 
[It seems to me that some modern phrases have crept into Óskar's text; I'll 
check on this later. - Haukur] 
standa saman 
stick together, stand united 
standa með + dat stick with someone, help someone
gefa sik 
give in, surrender 
3. Exercises 
3.1 Translate the phrases into English 
a. Þeir ganga saman um víðan vang. 
b. Þeir sjá menn standa við forsinn. 
c. Annarr spyrr, "Hverir standa þar, við forsinn?" 
d. Þá svarar hinn, "Þeir kalla sik Eirík ok Hauk, ok eru norskir." 


=== PAGE 104 ===

e. "Hvat gjøra slíkir menn hér?", spyrr annarr hinn. 
f. Jarlar Noregs eigu marga hunda ok þræla írska. 
g. Í Noregi er oft íss í vágum, svá at vísir menn sigla þar eigi. 
h. Hann gengr til groenna skóga, þar er álfarnir búa. 
i. Þeir ganga saman á hálum ísi, en falla eigi. 
j. "Hér er háll íss. Ek vil eigi ganga hér um." 
3.2 Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
a. "Lord, protect us," an Irish man says. 
b. "I am lord here, and protect you," says the earl. 
c. "[The] Lord in Heaven ("Drottinn á himni") will not help." 
d. "[The] Lord himself is with us," another Irish man says. 
e. "But is he not in Heaven? ("á himni?")", the earl asks. 
f. [The] Lord in Heaven protects the men while they sail. 
g. The earl calls (says) himself the lord of the slaves. 
h. Icelandic men protect themselves ("vernda sik sjálfa") against 
Norwegian kings. 
i. They take (go with) an old man to the boat. 
3.3 Translate the texts into English 
Þórr heitir áss, ok er sterkr mjök ok oft reiðr. Hann á hamar góðan. Þórr ferr 
oft til Jötunheima ok vegr þar marga jötna með hamrinum. Þórr á ok vagn er 
flýgr. Hann ekr vagninum um himininn. Þar er Þórr ekr, er stormr. 
Þórr kennir orm, er menn kalla Miðgarðsorm. Ormrinn er langr ok hringar sik 
allan um heim manna, Miðgarð. Þórr vill veiða orminn ok vega hann, því at 
hann er illr. 
Þórr kennir ok jötun er á bát. Þórr tekr vagninn ok ekr. Hann ekr vagninum ór 
Ásgarði ok um himininn. Hann ferr til jötunsins. Er hann finnr jötuninn kallar 
hann til hans, "Jötunn, þú skalt taka bátinn er þú átt ok hjálpa mér. Vit munum 
fara ok veiða sjálfan Miðgarðsorm." Jötunninn er mjök hræddr, ok svarar, "Ek 
skal gjøra sem þú býðr, Þórr, því at ef ek gjøri eigi svá, vegr þú mik. En 
ormrinn mun eta okkr báða, því at hann er stórr ok illr." En Þórr er áss bæði 
djarfr ok reiðr ok vill fara gegn Miðgarðsormi. 
Því næst róa þeir saman á báti jötunsins. Þá kømr slíkr stormr, at jötunninn 
verðr hræddr mjök. Er Þórr sér hann svá hræddan, mælir hann, "Sjá, jötunn, 
hér er hamarrinn er vegr þik ef þú roer eigi," ok sýnir hánum reiðr hamarinn. 
 
Óláfr kallar sik konung alls Noregs. Jarlar Noregs skulu ok kalla hann konung. 
Ef jarl gjørir eigi svá, ferr Óláfr konungr gegn hánum ok rekr hann ór Noregi. 
En margir jarlar vilja eigi kalla Óláf konung, svá at þeir standa saman gegn 
hánum. 
Jarl heitir Ragnarr, er kallar Óláf eigi konung. Óláfr konungr foerir marga 
menn gegn hánum ok segir: "Heill, Ragnarr jarl. Kalla þú mik Drottin, eða ek 


=== PAGE 105 ===

mun reka þik ór Noregi." Svá býðr konungr jarli (translate: "the earl"). 
Ragnarr svarar, "Heill, Óláfr. Vit skulum eigi leiða svá marga menn hverja 
gegn öðrum. Ek skal nú fara ok leiða alla er standa með mér. Vér skulum sigla 
brott í bátunum ok vér skulum eigi koma aftr til Noregs, meðan þú lifir. En ek 
mun eigi kalla þik konung, Óláfr, því at þú ert eigi góðr maðr ok þú munt eigi 
góðr konungr verða." 
Hinir jarlarnir standa eigi með Ragnari gegn Óláfi. Konungrinn hefir svá 
marga menn, at Ragnarr gefr sik hánum ok ferr. Hann segir mönnunum er eru 
með hánum: "Vér skulum nú fara, því at níðingrinn Óláfr leiðir marga menn 
gegn oss, ok hinir jarlarnir standa eigi með oss. Óláfr gefr oss grið, svá at vér 
skulum sigla brott ok finna oss nýjan heim." Margir menn fara með hánum í 
bátana, en sumir gjøra eigi svá. Þeir fara til Óláfs konungs, því at þeir eru 
norskir menn ok vilja búa í Noregi. 
 
Kormákr heitir þræll ok Svartr annarr. Kormákr er írskr maðr. Svartr er danskr, 
ok ungr mjök ok sterkr. Kormákr er gamall maðr ok spakr. 
Jarl býðr nú bæði Kormáki ok Svarti at fara í skóginn ok finna við. Viðinn 
skal brenna hjá jarli. 
Þeir fara nú báðir í skóginn. Við skóginn er stórr hóll, ok háll íss í vangi. 
Svartr segir við Kormák ("to Cormack"), "Vit skulum ganga yfir ísinn." 
Kormákr mælir þá Svarti, "Eigi skal þat svá, því at yfir ís svá hálan, sem þú 
sér þar, skal eigi ganga. Þar falla menn í ísinn, ok deyja. Kom þú með mér, ok 
göngum vér nú á hólinn." 
Ganga þeir svá á hólinn ok af hánum í skóginn. Kormákr mælir, "Í skógum 
eru oft illir vargar. En ver eigi hræddr, því at Drottinn himna verndar okkr." 
Svartr segir þá, "himna-drottin kenni ek, er hefir hamar góðan ok flýgr í vagni 
um himininn. Sjá, Kormákr, hér hefi ek Þórshamar, en meðan ek hefi hann 
mun Þórr vernda okkr báða." Kormákr segir, "Eigi verndar okkr Þórr né 
hamarrinn; Drottinn á himni er með okkr, ok mun vernda okkr gegn illum 
vörgum." Finna þeir nú viðinn ok foera hann jarli. 
3.4 Translate the text into Old Norse 
Ragnar now leads many vikings into the boats and sails away. "We have no 
slaves, for Olaf the Oppressor takes them all. We shall go and find Irish slaves, 
in Westway. Then we shall find another homeland and live there." The 
vikings say "You shall lead us, Earl Ragnar, to Westway ("í Vestrveg"), and 
we will do as ("svá er") you bid." 
As they sail away, out of the cove, they see many green meadows, broad 
cascades, and forests wide. Ragnar speaks, "Evil is the oppressor Olaf, to 
("at") drive us out of Norway, with such green meadows and forests. We will 
not find such cascades in another home." 
4. Looking at real texts 


=== PAGE 106 ===

4.1 Half a strophe from Þrymskviða 
Loki suggests the following to Þórr: 
Mun ek ok með þér
ambátt vera. 
Vit skulum aka tvau
í Jötunheima. 
Notice the plural of 'Jötunheimr'. 
ambátt female slave
tvau 
two 
Notice the difference between 'munu' and 'skulu'. The first is a statement of 
fact (as far as a statement about the future can be) while the second is more 
like a suggestion. But in reality the verbs could be interchanged here with no 
real change in meaning. Thorpe, for example, translates both with 'will': 
I will with thee 
as a servant go: 
we two will drive
to Jötunheim. 
4.2 An answer from Gylfaginning 
Hár segir: "Þat eru tveir úlfar, ok heitir sá er eftir henni ferr Skoll. Hann 
hræðisk hon ok hann mun taka hana. En sá heitir Hati Hróðvitnisson er fyrir 
henni hleypr ok vill hann taka tunglit, ok svá mun verða." 
Remember the feminine pronoun, 'she': 
nom. hon 
acc. hana 
dat. henni 


=== PAGE 107 ===

gen. hennar
tveir 
two 
eftir + dat behind, after
fyrir + dat in front of 
hræðisk 
fears 
tunglit 
the moon 
sá 
the one 
ferr 
goes, fares 
 
 
 
Old Norse for Beginners - Lesson Nine 
by Óskar Guðlaugsson and Haukur Þorgeirsson 
1. Grammar 
1. Genitive Case: Partition 
2. Dative Case: Instrumental 
3. Verbs with Dative and Genitive 
4. Strong Masculine Declensions 
5. Infinitive Clauses 
6. Clauses of Purpose, Sequences 
2. Vocabulary 
1. Nouns 
2. Pronouns 
3. Adjectives 
4. Verbs 
5. Adverbs 
6. Prepositions 
7. Conjunctions 
8. Phrases 
3. Exercises 
1. Translate the phrases into English 


=== PAGE 108 ===

2. Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
3. Translate the text into English 
4. Translate the text into Old Norse 
1. Grammar 
1.1 Genitive Case: Partition 
There are some more uses to the genitive case than possession, presented last 
lesson. This can be seen through observation of the English genitive; in 
English, this case is marked by 's, for possession exclusively, but more 
commonly by the preposition 'of'. Examples: 
'Norway's king is called Olaf.''The King of Norway is called Olaf.'
'Peter's car is blue.''The car of Peter is blue.' 
Using the 's is normal for possession, except in the case of titles, like 'The 
King of Norway.' But there are other types of genitive, or at least other cases 
where the 'of' preposition is used abstractively: 
'Three of us came over.' 'He saw all of them.' 
This is called 'partitive genitive'. There we're using the genitive to mark the 
whole whence an amount derives; 'hundreds of men.' - from an undefined 
mass called 'men', 'hundreds' are selected. The genitive would seem logical, as 
the extracted amount belongs to the original whole. 
Luckily, Old Norse uses the genitive in the exact same way. Except, of course, 
its genitive is marked exclusively through inflection and not by the help of 
prepositions. So, first an example of the possessive usage we already know: 
Bátr Óláfs er langr. 
Then, an example of the partitive genitive: 
Sumir vár vilja eigi vera í Úlfarsheimi. 'Some of us don't want to be in 
Úlfarsheimr.' 
Note, by the way, that the verb conjugates in the third person in this example. 
Though it may seem to be a semantic first person, the verb refers to 'sumir', 
which is a third group. Remember that verbs always agree to the subject in the 
sentence, and the subject is always in nominative (like 'sumir', but unlike 'vár'). 
1.2 Dative Case: Instrumental 
As detailed in lesson 5, section 1.1, the dative case in ON originates from a 
fusion of many different case forms. But the various functions of those 
originally different cases still remain in the dative case. One of those functions 
is called "instrumental", and marks the object with which the verb is executed. 
Examples: 


=== PAGE 109 ===

"He slays the dragon with the mighty sword." "He comes to England by ship." 
"It's a Trial by Fire." 
In those sentences, "sword", "ship" and "fire" serve instrumental functions, 
and are marked in English by the instrumental case prepositions "with" and 
"by". 
In ON, we have until now relied on the preposition "með" + dat, which marks 
instruments, among other things. But ON can also omit any preposition, 
relying on the naked dative form to identify the instrumental function. 
Example: 
"Þórr vegr jötuninn hamri." Thor slays the giant with a hammer. 
This function of the dative is not very common, especially not in prose. 
1.3 Verbs with Dative and Genitive 
So far, we have used only verbs followed by a direct object marked with 
accusative. However, to complicate matters, the 'patients' of many ON verbs 
are not marked with accusative, but rather with dative or even genitive (rare), 
as illogical as it may seem: 
"Ek kasta steini." 'I throw a stone.' (dative) 
"Þeir moeta hánum." 'They meet him.' (dative)
"Hon saknar hans." 'She misses him.' (genitive)
The explanation to this phenomenon probably lies in the etymology of the 
individual verbs; a verb's original meaning may have logically called for such 
case marking, but then changed meaning while retaining the case use. The 
compulsory dative marking would in a great many cases stem from 
instrumental dative usage (see 1.2 above) which has "frozen" (become 
mandatory). At the same time, other verbs of similar meaning may then have 
changed to model themselves to the anomalous verb, so that all verbs of a 
similar "theme" meaning will govern the same case; e.g. all verbs that 
describe "projectile" meanings (like "kasta" above) tend to govern dative. 
In any case, by the time of Old Norse it is no longer practical to consider such 
(perhaps obscure) historical details; it is most practical to say that the 
grammatic case governed by an ON verb is one of its inherent variables, to be 
learnt as soon as one learns the verb itself. 
Thus, from now on, verbs will be specifically identified with the case they 
govern: 
vega, veg + acc slay kasta, kasta + dat throw
sakna, sakna + gen miss, feel the loss of 
Most verbs learnt so far govern accusative; the only exception is: 


=== PAGE 110 ===

sigla, sigli + dat sail 
It may be of help to some students, however, to try to assign some minimal 
logic to some of the abnormal case use, perhaps especially with verbs that 
govern the genitive case. For example, with the example above of the verb 
'sakna', one may assume something like this as an explanation: 
"Hon saknar hans." "She misses his [presence]." 
But this is only recommended as a mnemonic, for those whom it helps. 
1.4 Strong Masculine Declensions 
The strong masculine is certainly the most varied declension. Some strong 
masculines end in -ir in the nominative. They decline quite easily: 
hilmir 'king'
 
sg 
pl 
nom hilmir hilmar 
acc hilmi hilma 
dat hilmi hilmum
gen hilmis hilma 
The dative cannot be 'hilmii', as 'ii' is not possible in ON. 
A very large group of nouns within the declension are declined like this: 
staðr 'place'
 
sg 
pl 
nom staðr staðir 
acc stað staði 
dat stað stöðum
gen staðar staða 
Strong masculines of this type are called 'i-stems'; the ones we know so far are 
called 'a-stems'. To summarize, i-stem declension is different in the following 
ways: 


=== PAGE 111 ===

a. a) gen sg -ar, not -s 
b. b) nom pl -ir, not -ar 
c. c) acc pl -i, not -a 
d. d) dat sg -Ø, not -i ('Ø' is commonly used to symbolize "no ending") 
A few strong masculines' declension is a mix between i-stem and a-stem 
declension: 
 
sg 
pl 
nom skógr skógar 
acc skóg skóga 
dat skógi skógum
gen skógar skóga 
That is, i-stem gen sg -ar, but otherwise just like other a-stems. The only such 
words we have encountered so far are 'skógr' and 'matr'. 
Some i-stem nouns have -s in the sg gen. 
So, as you'll be thinking by now, how do we keep track of all this? We intend 
to do so by using a new way to introduce future vocabulary from the strong 
masculine declension: 
hestr, hests, hestar 
horse
vinr, vinar, vinir 
friend
skógr, skógar, skógar forest
hilmir, hilmis, hilmar king 
áss, áss, æsir 
god 
These three case forms are what characterize and identify the different 
declensions, nom sg (as before), gen sg, and nom pl. From now on, make sure 
you learn to which declension each strong masculine noun belongs, before 
you continue. Names will also be presented this way, though not with the 
plural form, e.g.: 
Njáll, Njáls 
Haraldr, Haralds 


=== PAGE 112 ===

Þorvarðr, Þorvarðar
1.5 Infinitive Clauses 
With verbs like 'claim' or 'believe', English can have full clauses following 
with all its main verbs in infinitive. In those clauses, the infinitive is always 
marked with 'to': 
I believe him to be passed away. 
I claim her to be may legal heir. 
I believe it to have happened already.
In ON, such infinitive clauses are even more prolific. The difference to 
English is that the infinitive marker (at) is never used, and the verb infinitive 
tends to be idiomatically placed last in the sentence. As in the English 
example sentences above, the subject of the infinitive clause is not in 
nominative, but rather in accusative: 
"Ek tel hann góðan mann vera." I believe him to be a good man.
"Ek segi þik illan konung vera." I claim you to be an evil king. 
In lesson 3, section 1.2, infinitive clauses with sense words like 'see' and 'hear' 
were taught. They are analogous to the clauses presented above: 
"Vér sjám þá ganga um skóginn." We see them walking around the 
forest. 
"Þeir heyra konunginn mæla." They hear the king speak. 
And as mentioned there, clauses with the word 'vita' (to know): 
"Ask veit ek standa." An ash I know standing.
1.6 Clauses of Purpose, Sequences 
Some subordinate clauses express purpose: 
"They go to find the wood." ("they go - [in order] to find the wood")
In ON, such clauses are connected to the main clause by "til at": 
"Þeir fara til at finna viðinn." 
Alternatively, one might say: 


=== PAGE 113 ===

"Þeir fara at finna viðinn." 
This merely indicates a sequence of events, though purpose is strongly 
suggested. This omission of "til" is quite common. 
2. Vocabulary 
2.1 Nouns 
vinr, vinar, vinir 
friend 
áss, áss, æsir 
ace, god, one of the Æsir 
askr, asks, askar 
ash tree; small wooden pot 
sveinn, sveins, sveinar 
young man 
peningr, penings, 
peningar 
money 
máttr, máttar, mættir 
power 
kaupmaðr, -manns, -menn merchant 
dómr, dóms, dómar 
judgement, -hood ("state of being" suffix) 
þrældómr, -dóms, -dómar slavery 
Kristr, Krists 
Christ 
Mjölnir, Mjölnis 
Mjolner, Thor's hammer 
Askr Yggdrasils 
The Ash of Yggdrasil, the World Tree 
Útgarðr 
Outgard, alternate name for Gianthome 
Surtr 
Surt, the Fire Giant 
Múspellsheimr 
Muspellsheim, the World of Fire Giants 
Ása-Þór 
"Thor of [the] Æsir", alternate name for 
Thor 


=== PAGE 114 ===

2.2 Pronouns 
Demonstrative pronoun, masculine: 
sá 
that, the one 
that 
 
 
 
sg 
pl 
nom sá 
þeir 
acc þann 
þá 
dat þeim 
þeim 
gen þess 
þeira 
Example of the demonstrative "that" function: 
"Hvat heitir sá maðr, er stendr hjá jarli?" "What is that man called, who 
stands by the earl?" 
This also serves as a relative pronoun, "the one that"; for example 
"Sá er fiska veiðir..." The one who catches fish...
Note how the plural simply uses the masc 3p pl personal pronoun. 
2.3 Adjectives 
heitr 
hot 
norroenn Nordic 
vitr 
wise 
alvitr 
omniscient, all-knowing 
frjáls 
free 
sjúkr 
sick 


=== PAGE 115 ===

blindr 
blind 
2.4 Verbs 
smíða, smíð 
craft, make 
trúa, trúi + dat 
believe; believe in, have faith in 
leita, leita + gen search; search for 
kaupa, kaupi 
buy 
halda, held + dat hold, keep 
velja, vel 
choose 
gjalda, geld + dat pay 
sigla, sigli + dat sail 
rísa, rís 
rise 
lækna, lækna 
heal 
And one present-preterite verb: 
vita know (a fact)
 
sg 
pl 
1p veit vitum
2p veizt vituð
3p veit vitu 
It should be mentioned now that the character 'z' represents a combination of 
't','d' or 'ð' + 's', just as 'x' is a combination of 'k' and 's'. This makes the form 
'veizt' more understandable, as it essentially the stem 'veit' + the ending '-st'; 
'veitst' > 'veizt'. The 'z' was originally pronounced 'ts', but tended to simplify 
to 's' in later ON and its descendant languages. 


=== PAGE 116 ===

2.5 Adverbs 
aldregi never 
hvar 
where 
hvaðan whence/where from
þaðan thence/there from 
héðan hence/here from 
heldr but rather 
enn 
still 
til 
more, yet more 
2.6 Prepositions 
undir + dat under 
meðal + gen among(st)
frá + dat 
from 
2.7 Conjunctions 
svá sem such as
3. Exercises 
3.1 Translate the phrases into English 
a. "Sumir yðvar fara aldregi heim til Noregs." 
b. "Veizt þú eigi, hvárt menninir skulu sigla brott?" 
c. "Eigi veit ek, hverir mannanna skulu sigla." 
d. "Kristr heitir drottinn sá, er verndar oss." 
e. "Ek veit annan, er verndar oss hamri gegn illum jötnum." 


=== PAGE 117 ===

f. "Hvárt mun sá Þórr heita, ok hamarrinn Mjölnir?" 
g. "Eigi hefir sá Kristr slíkan hamar er Mjölnir er." 
h. "Kristr hefir eigi hamra eða branda, því at hann er góðr ok vegr eigi 
menn né jötna." 
3.2 Translate the phrases into Old Norse 
a. There are many villains among Olaf's friends. 
b. "That viking is such a villain, that he never spares good men." 
c. "Thor's might is in the hammer." 
d. "Do you know, slave, whence they come, who they are, and what they 
call themselves?" 
e. "They come from Westway, and are Irish men. They call themselves 
free." 
f. "No good men come from there. Take the sword and bring them to 
me." 
g. "Some of you are thieves, who take horses. Who are they?" 
h. "Those who know, shall bring me the thieves." 
i. "The thieves must give in. If they do not do so, I will kill you all." 
3.3 Translate the text into English 
Oddr segir við Ragnar jarl, "Seg mér, jarl, af heiminum, af jötnum ok ásum." 
Ragnarr svarar, "Þat skal ek, Oddr." 
"Í heimi stendr askr stórr er vér köllum Ask Yggdrasils. Við askinn eru heimar 
þeir er heita Miðgarðr, þar er vér búm; Útgarðr, þar er jötnar búa, en hann 
heitir ok Jötunheimr; ok Ásgarðr, þar er æsir búa. Undir askinum búa dvergar, 
er smíða bauga ok branda." 
"Drottin ása köllum vér Óðin, ok er hann áss mjök spakr. Hann hefir hrafna, er 
heita Huginn ok Muninn, ok fljúga þeir hrafnar um heimana. Þat, er hrafnarnir 
sjá, sér ok Óðinn. Því er Óðinn áss alvitr. Í Ásgarði býr ok áss sá er Þórr heitir. 
Þórr hefir hamarinn Mjölni ok flýgr hann oft til Jötunheims ok vegr með 
hánum jötna. Margir æsir búa í Ásgarði, ok vernda þeir allir mennina ok 
heiminn, gegn illum jötnum." 
"Surt veit ek búa í Múspellsheimi. Sá er stórr ok illr jötunn elds. Í heimi þeim 
brenna heitir eldar ok mun Surtr leiða þaðan jötna gegn ásum. Hann mun vega 
æsi eldi ok brandi þeim, er hann hefir. Illr er mjök jötunn sá." 
"Í Miðgarði búm vér menninir. Um Miðgarð allan veit ek orm hringa sik, er 
vér köllum Miðgarðsorm. Ormr sá er illr. Ása-Þór vill veiða þann orm ok vega 
hann hamrinum." 
Oddr mælir nú, "Kenni ek nú marga æsi. En sumir segja mér af öðrum, er þeir 
nefna Krist. Hvárt er sá meðal ása?" Ragnarr svarar, "Sá er eigi áss, heldr 
maðr. Menn segja hann lækna sjúka ok blinda, rísa aftr dauðr, ok koma af 
himnum. Margir norroenna manna trúa nú hánum, en sjálfr veit ek eigi mátt 
Krists." 


=== PAGE 118 ===

 
Fara nú Ragnarr ok víkingarnir at leita sér þræla meðal írskra manna. Þeir 
kaupa þar í Vestrvegi marga unga sveina af norroenum kaupmönnum, er halda 
sveinunum þrældómi. Kaupmaðr segir, "Sveinarnir eru sterkir mjök, ok sá 
kaupir vel er þá velr. Tak þú, jarl, þá sveina er þar standa, þá gef ek þér annan 
til." 
Ragnarr telr kaupmanninn bjóða sér vel, ok geldr hánum peningum. Býðr 
hann svá þrælunum at ganga í bátana, ok siglir brott. 
 
Er Svartr ok Kormákr foera viðinn heim til jarls, spyrr Svartr Kormák, "Hvárt 
eru allir írskir menn þrælar, sem þú ert, Kormákr?" Kormákr svarar, "Eigi 
erum vér allir þrælar en mörgum vár halda norroenir menn í þrældómi." 
3.4 Translate the text into Old Norse 
Many (of) Nordic men believe in (the) Æsir, but not all of them. Some believe 
in Christ, Lord of Heaven. Irish men do not believe in the Æsir, but rather in 
Lord Christ. 
The King of Norway commands all Norwegian men to call himself King. He 
also commands them not to have faith in the Æsir, but rather in Christ. Others, 
such as (the) earls of Norway, say that Thor will slay Christ himself ("segja 
Þór munu vega sjálfan Krist..."), with his hammer, Mjolner. Many of (the) 
Norwegians believe the earls. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
